A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent
A Russian household simple quite,
A Russian in Childe Harold's cloak,
A Vampire fond of meditation,
A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.
A bastard fame prohibited?
A bill of fare hangs full in sight
A Russian poem's mechanism
A ball here, there a children's treat,
A ball in Peter's capital,
A bearded postillion astride
A beau is for Tattiana found!
A blood-bespattered shade would rise,
A bottle of a vintage white
A beauty languidly at rest,
A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
A boat with splashing oar floats by,
A bogy conjured up in joke,
A book at early morn perused.
A box of terrible import.
A breathless silence then, prolonged--
A careless looker-on estranged
A bristly bear of monstrous size!
A canine face with horns thereon,
A certain little escapade
A case of books he doth obtain--
A charm with it in conversation.
A child devoid of childishness
A constant harping on one tune,
A door he opens. But why shrank
A countenance perplexed and scared.
A country damsel's album trim,
A crab upon a spider rides,
A critic of the stage malicious,
A faithful model she appeared
A cup of tea upon a tray.
A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
A feeble version read below,
A fond and careful mother been.
A forest now she sees in front
A curious interest disclose
A dagger, asterisk, or note
A deadly pallor, air distressed;
A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,
A fop, in dress pedantical.
A dinner, whimsical each course,
A dwarf adorned with tail, again
A game of chess would often play,
A double force unto their song
A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
A duellist of classic mind,
A due which must to earth be paid.The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
A dying man with art to soothe,
A few of different temper deemed,
A horse's hoofs she hears--She shrinks!
A flimsy trace of musings past
A gust of passion never tore
A hidden meaning could impart,
A fragile bridge and insecure,
A friar black approaching near,
A million bipeds reckons thus
A fiery and eccentric mind,
A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
A finished madrigal would frame
A first success light pinions gave,
A gambling troop when he controlled,
A friendly hand thy life hath ta'en!
A grammar, likewise Petriads two,
A garden by a shining rill.
A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
A hand of ice appeared to seize
A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
A happy destiny ordained:
A little Juvenal to spout,
A loaded pistol in his hand."Advance!"--
A mild quotation to translate,
A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
A new world was made manifest!Although we know that Eugene had
A hermit's life Oneguine led,
A hidden train of wild desire.
A jolly song and distant horn;
A journey to Moscow! To see the world!
A mien unaltered she preserved,
A joyous troop of little boys
A kerchief round her silver hair
A lethargy of sense, a trance,
A little farther please to read
A little virgin mirror peeps.
A maiden's secrets--of the heart.Triumphs--their own or those of friends--
A mansion--by the window, see!
A marriageable maid matured,
A moment effervescing stirs,
A mournful temper on his Muse.
A novel in Lafontaine's style,
A prudent man like you and brave
A hemisphere beneath her sway,
A hundred times will not repeat,
A life in common with the rest;
A labour, torment, yet a joy,
A life of fact, not fiction, led--
A lady draws the hostess near,
A love which knew no limitation,
A modern Regulus unchained,
A lady's hand doth never kiss.
A love epistle he doth scrawl.
A new proprietor arrived,
A pair; though desolate my mind,
A lover's letter might convey,
A nursling yet for Hope to school.
A pair of bullets--nought beside--
A passing snowstorm wreathed away
A passionate desire to bend
A pleasure though with sorrow knit:
A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,
A print without the picture's grace,
A promenade in twilight late
A register of fleeting thought,
A riding whip. She strolls along.
A single being: 'twas in fine
A lancer captivates her heart!
A lancer her soul dotes upon:
A new acquaintance we must scan.
A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,
A letter for her hero meant:
A maid hath oft, may yet again
A noted fop who gambled hard.Like his, her dress was always nice,
A load of care upon the maid."But lo! forth from the valleys dun
A notoriety proclaimed,
A paragon of virtue he!
A pensive sorrow in her glance
A ring she heard the ancient strain:
A philosophic anchorite:
A rivulet beneath them shoots
A simple tombstone hath been set.There, when the rains of spring we mark
A smile from slumbering nature clear
A table to the fire is brought,
A thick immense neglected grove
A timid love to banishment?--
Afar, where clothed in green and gold
A true Childe Harold my Eugene
A very troublesome disease,
A true account and in detail.But not at present, though sincerely
A vision desolate and drear
A visionary mortified,
A wish from place to place to roam,
After the wedded couple strain;
A weary season was at hand--
A while ago the winter spent,
Abandon cities riotous,
Accents of rapture or despair
Alas! the friend of childish days
"Abandon hope for ever here!"
Abandoned he his country seat,
Above the humble urn of death.
Affection how did you requite?
"Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
Alas! how wretched now my lot!"
Alas! my friends, the years flit by
Alike by sighs and flattery.
All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
All with urbanity betray,
A scant attendance Lenski showed
A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
A sense of social delight,
A shape half cat and half a crane.Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:
A slave of actresses capricious,
A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
A sportsman who in covert lies.But finally she heaves a sigh,
A stream, by winter's ice unbound,
A strong resemblance these possess--
A something somehow have obtained,
A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.To consanguineous dinners they
A substitute for lamps we hail!Obedient she had ever been
A trouble fell upon the sprites;
A tangled wilderness around.
A tender couplet he combined,
A village and beneath, a wood,
A tombstone, Aphrodite's shrine,
A whisper runs along the hall,
A wild enthusiastic tongue,
A young and handsome galliard.
A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
Across the stage still madly sweep,
Adieu! whate'er thou didst desire
Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
Adroitly seized and carried her;
All arise. To the door he goes.Terror assails her. Hastily
A timid, shrinking love to grieve.
A trifle pale, a trifle lean,
A visionary personage
Abandoning insane delight,
Afar is borne by cruel fate,
All overtures of friendship ended.
About the crop of hay, the wine,
Again her rural life she sought,
Ah! he has gone the other way"--
All Nature winter seemed to await,
All are constrained and fetters bear,
Again the plague of boyhood--love?The hours once more Oneguine counts,
Age immature averse to cheat--
Alas! for now before her passed
Alas! the youthful lover slain,
All dark and silent hath become;
A windmill too a jig performs
A young man motionless he saw,
About the rain and flax and cattle."--
_Affectionately yours till death_.
Alas! with merited reproach.
Absorbed in melancholy mood
Address to you one single phrase
Acquaintance instantly to make.
All the creations which below
All this in many cases brings
All this may be an empty dream,
Again a century should scourge
All mothers their sweet girls believed
Again in her ethereal dance?
Albums magnificent which scare
All so distinct, and all so white!
All sons of mental weariness.Eight rubbers were already played,
All this was novel to Eugene.
All visited him at first, of course;
Almost became a poet say--
Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,
A valuable hostage gained,
A victim decked with golden leaves;
A white and undulating pall
A young Armida's lips to press,
"Adieu! thou home where peace abides,
A worthy object 'tis, and well
Above the yawning grave would fight,--
Across her youth a shade had come,
Across the Baltic's salt sea waves,
Admired his judgment, which was fine,
Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
Adieu, thou witness of our glory,
Across the gloom of heaven would sail
Across the smiling face of dawn.Alas! Tattiana fades away,
Adorned with many a vision bright
Ah! I still struggle to forget
Again imagination blazed,
Again the giddy waltz repeats.
Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
Ah! I'm so weak--my throbbing breast!
Ah! it may be, affection true
Ah! brethren, what was my delight
"Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!
Ah! than a spectre from the dead
Ah! what hath fate not torn away!
Alarm the winter journey gave.The date was fixed though oft postponed,
Against my inclination, friends,
Akulka who was once Celine,
Alas! It is not hard to guess.
Alarmed by jealous agonies:
Alas! abroad I cannot go.
Above the ashes of the dead.
Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
Accelerates her hasty pace,
"Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!
All in the good old style appears,
All silently hung down his head.
All that perfection could desire;
"Alas! my friend, no revenue!"
All that industrial London brings
All to the grand saloon are gone--
Alas! she is as hard, behold,
"Aline!"
All which in Paris eager taste,
All about Olga--to a light
All are amazed; but Lenski he
All breathless and without replies.
Allure the young gallant
All that the heart would fain express--
All which caprice and affluence craves,
Alone amid possessions great,
All that a poet could desire,
All covered up with snow in heaps,
All slumber. In the drawing-room
All rattled in the ball-room vast,
All the young people round about,
Alone beneath your rooftree stay
All this I know is out of date,
Alone he doth his claret drink,
All this, my friends, translate aright:
All to the doctors Eugene send,
Alone beside it, gray and bent,
All vanished as an echo goes.
Alone she gallops on her steed,
Alone the princess sitteth there,
Amidst successes flattering
Alone with my Venetian maid,
Along the Neva's bank he sleighs,
Alone within his habitation
Along Saint Petersburg's paved streets,
Already Autumn chilled the sky,
Already by repentance moved
Already he grew phthisical.
Am I to go through the whole list?""How dull you are this morning, nurse!"
Also my wretched liberty
Also the works of Fontenelle,
Also, to equalise the scales,
Although unknown to fame mayhap,
Always together, eventide
Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
Amid the company career.
An ace at fifteen paces bored.
An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
An explanation: she was scared,
And  they
Already dance to song proceeds;
Along the hall, and high above
Already sings the nightingale.
Also one Viazemski, remarking
Also their feet--yet ne'ertheless
Although her book did not contain
An innate love of meditation,
Although it will not bear translation,
An ear to my confession lend;
And Schiller read by candlelight.
And Flianoff, somewhat indisposed,
And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
And Lenski, closing his left eye,
And about dawn upon his breast
And a boy handed round the cream.
And a malicious epigram
And all thy precious elegies,
And after Albion's proud lyre
And all the three to breakfast went;
And all your love on self bestow;
And be as happy--as I might.
And also fashionable beaux.Our hero stops and doth alight,
And also that my feeble verse--
And an enchanting shoulder shines
And ancient usages observed
And be not in advance severe.
And beats with rapid foot the floor.
And cool sagacious mind he had:
And bitter torment never known.
And breathe a drama in his ear.
And blest the shadows of the night."To-morrow's dawn will glimmer gray,
And cried within myself: 'tis he!
And both of dull existence tired,
And breathe the balmy breath of night;
And dost thou know her?"--"We live near."
And dream of life's delightful dawn?The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
And, inspiration firing me,
And blush to own himself reflect.
And breathes upon the chilly glass,
And brooding o'er the ills he bore,
And by the fiddle's rushing sound
And devastate the woods around.There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!
And by the world repeated oft,
And can it be? But late a child
And privileges nice allowed,
And endless the cotillon seemed
And husbands' tedious amity?
And following them ye might espy
And the fair sex as light as down!
"And is it she? It must be--no--
And leads a solitary life?
And no ridiculous report,
And terrify a swarm of ducks,
And though I read it with distress,
And thoughtlessness to woe might lead."Thus did our friend Oneguine preach:
And galloped home. But pistols twain,
And gloomy epigrams malicious.How oft, when on a summer night
And honestly 'tis my belief
And in a vision, sinless, bright,
And in the morning doth not know
And leave a marsh the fertile ground
And lessons to his children read.
And like a shadow haunted her.
And lo! five paces more they pass,
And loves you as--a relative!Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
And now a fickle flirt and wild,
And now we hear delightedly
And oft its Dictionary thumb.
And scanned in silence its content.
And satisfied with vengeance ta'en.
And they the waters recommend.He went not--sooner was prepared
And that no longer could inspire.
And so departed. But Eugene,
And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.
And slowly life coagulates--
And so--God bless them, if He list.In this the love of the fair sex
And the eternal lorgnette through
And sometimes into snares as well
And straight returning whence he came,
And though her soul might be confused,
And through the lofty windows views
And thus each stubbornly proceeds.
And to the field of honour led;
And thus he spent eight years of time,
And to revive Tattiana seemed.The chairs are thrust back with a roar,
And true, his pistol's faultless aim
And well-instructed to betray!
And due precautions take betimes.
And ease and fashionable waste,--
And enmity and hope and love--
And fashion's gay frivolities;
And finally he deigns let fall
And flowed harmoniously. He took
And from his dressing-room would pass
And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.
And from the Millionaya afar
And gallicisms I love as well
And grasp a stirrup fortunate--
And happy unto you appear.
And he had made her heart beat quick!
And lo! he is already there!
And long perukes hath vanished.
And madrigals I'm asked to write!
And hot with jealous indignation,
And ought he not to disregard
And overcome antipathies
And sallied forth one brilliant morn--
And testy gamesters do engage
And then to meditate for days
And this the faithful one allows,
And pressed her hand--the crimson blush
And rising from her bench proceeds;
And the more surely we ensnare
And thus in season the rich field
And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
And vehemently though amazed
Are ye replaced by other maids
And gallops to her house away.
And gently hovered o'er my head?
And heard a voice cry--_Why! He's killed!_--
And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit
And in her grasp the letter shakes,
And irrigate them with champagne;
And isolated from all men,
And jests doth recapitulate.
And his strange conduct at the dance
And homeward like an arrow tore.My friends, the poet ye regret!
And hurried home his awful freight.
And if Tattiana mine had found--
And jolting jarred the window-frames.
And like Childe Harold gloomily
And like the prisoner's our delight
And pleasure's daily blandishment,
And, by the way, I here assert
And mental elasticity.
And pauses oft to serve out bread.
And pelt him with cherries,
And the attendants called in haste.
And supper. In the country we
And with remorseful anguish filled,
And, hanging down her head, the maid
Approach not to hearken
And we--an unattractive set--
And what like menaces fatigues,
And yet he in your cause would strive
And when the watery mirror gleamed
Another tribune of the ball
Around the garden homeward hies.
And who is not a tiresome thief?
Approach not to gaze at
And, sobbing at your feet, to blend
Applause, the people's donative.
Are admirable, my dear friend,
Are all your relatives quite well?
Are oft deceptive--like their feet.Where is Oneguine? Half asleep,
And never was the ear affright
And linen on him doth bestow.
And meditative homeward goes,
And never hath our language proud
And necessary fools allowed.
And now he views forgotten foes,
And now she skips and now she springs
And o'er the granite coping bent,
And now upon the snow in thaw
And platitudes and pedantry,
And of the irksome harness tires,
And on the last one, underlined:
And shut him in a lonely nook.He read as vainly as before,
And silently I here must die--
And soon imagination threw
And this fifth canto ought to be
And still the coachmen round the fires
And traces with a slender finger
And turned aside the drapery;
And what resulted? Drunk with love,
And wakened him with the loud cry:
And you, my youthful damsels fair,
And where a madrigal occurs
And, joy of souls effeminate,
And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
Approaches Olga and the pair
As giddy youth's hilarity--
And spouted it with lyric fire--
And think: here lies who loved me well,
And though perchance a lady may
And thus he never fell among
And thy protection I implore.
And various chords upon it proves,
And vows will probably be signed:
Another passed; 'twas just the same.
Approach, approach; I am thine own."Thus in a style _obscure_ and _stale_,
Around the meadow and the grove.
As it were, tore himself away.
And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
Another! to none other I
Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
Aroused in him some tenderness.
And with gray hair ambrosial
Antiquity no pleasure gave,
Arouses rustics from their sleep.
As if some troubled dream she dreamed.
As rosy lips without a smile,
Aroused in him sweet reverie.
As every journal now entreats,
As bees who leave their dainty store
As formerly much agitation.
As hope uncertain and as sweet,
As one who bivouacs afield,
As if he cruelly had joked!'Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
As in some frenzied dream of fear
As in their turn the seasons roll.
As the sins of my youthful days
As many dinners I rehearse,
As storms which in chill autumn rage
As vernal storms the fields athwart.
At each extreme one takes his stand,
As oft to meat and drink advert,
As on the rapid wings of thought
As partner of my mournful days,
As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,
As we lure the young gallant,
As when the tempest's veil is drawn
As yet none had discovered aught;
At eighteen not to play the fool!
Aside the foes their mantles threw,
Assuredly should not have been
At first, I clung to secrecy:
At his pale brow a shot to have,
As your light footprints on the green.Diana's bosom, Flora's cheeks,
Assigned a lodging, from the hall
At first, but soon became inured
Asunder was and hate prepared?
At morn I must assuredly
At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
Attractive in its banefulness?
Although the destined coffin nears,
Although we read him heaps of verse.
Amazed at the confusing crowd,
Amid a serious disputation,
Amid the snowdrifts which surround
Among some ancient ballads thrust,
Amid coquettes who pray to God
Amid the awful emptiness
Amid the soulless sons of pride
An exile from their troublous reign,
An oval countenance and pink,
Amy Petrovna  utters lies,
An almanac but eight years old.
And I discerned through Fancy's prism
An ancient lady full of grace.--
An hour passed by--another--till,
An infant maiden doth exhort
And I confess that now-a-days
An invalid from lung complaint.
And Eugene soon discovered there
And I to give thee cakes was wont?"--
And I, amid the friendly crowd,
And Limburg cheese alive and old
And dark and drear the evenings were,
And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
And Tania's husband soon appeared.--
And a long time about her talked.
And Moscow many a beauty fair:
And a grand festival proceeds.
And a guitar produced we see,
And a new diadem supplied.
And abject slaves who kiss the rod;
And after them at headlong pace
And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
And agitate my heart again;
And all in snow is buried deep.The wood she enters--bear behind,--
And an elegiac poem wrote.
And care but little for its ends.
And all the joys which Winter knows.
And an habitual sense of pain;
And boiling o'er with friendly heat,
And an old gent the poet marking
And cannot anything conceal,
And cry: he was a poet great!
And death before the husband wide
And deem the world perfection is!
And all that from thy hand proceeds--
And all with one accord agreed,
And an encouragement did breathe
And beckon to the passing sails.
And clad in airy costume took
And exclamations interlaced."Princesse, mon ange!"--"Pachette!"--
And fashionable magazines,
And disappear in space; then she
And eye which gleams with inspiration--
And distance interposed in vain,
And education runs to waste,
And every year distributed
And gossip of the town and fashion
And exclamations and good cheer.
And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,
And full of innocent delight,
And finally, upon his bed
And fits of coughing racked her chest.By the sick lady's gaiety
And for Tattiana, mournful maid,
And glasses unemployed all night;
And golden Autumn draweth nigh,
And by that shady rivulet
Amid submissive herds of men
An ardent heart and yet so mild?--
An ever transcendental flight;
An honourable course ye took,
And "Agathon" replied, amazed.
And Christian folk will, I expect,
An inn at every stage erect.But now, what wretched roads one sees,
An idle anchorite and sad,
And Comet champagne foaming flows.
And Flianoff, pensioned councillor,
And Eugene ever in her soul
And I admired their common sense
And Lenski followed--a light broke--
And I, remembering Svetlana,
And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
And a romance in ancient style
And a determined disposition,
And a half rubles down gave she;
And aimless journeys did commence--
And alphabetically tries
And at the stages bugs and fleas
And at the table sat her down.To tragedy, the fainting fit,
And barely visible the smoke
And consolation soon begot.
And blest me, sinking to the grave.
And buried deep in meditation,
And by a partial temper stirred
And courtier, fop, and usurer
And female tears hysterical,
And fled afar--she followed me.
And gave himself but little pain
And for a time our course delay,
And form a network left and right;
And from the country all around
And hark! the clank of spurs is heard
And gazed around with eyes of flame;
And gradually day unfolds.
And had with waddling in the end
And harmony was soon restored.
And hastened to his uncle's side,
And every morning I awake
And all without her husband's leave.
And as a country damsel roved,
And at economy was great;
And calmly sleeps the hours away,
And freezing fits of weariness.
And her upon the threshold laid.Recovering, Tania gazes round;
And handsome countenance combined,
And hat surnamed a "Bolivar"
And hated casual visitors,
And hates the world's discordant ways.
And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
And heedless of approval seems,
And her bespangled robe doth wave
And in society might shed
And her voice sweeter than the sounds
And his poor basten sandal knits.
And in her native language she
And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
And in the frosty night alone
And in the final tome we learnt,
And the old nurse a brief prayer said
And at the altar of their fame
And bends her mirror on the moon,
And contemplative dreaminess;
And better, if I judge aright;
And bitter tears of fright I shed.
And bless mankind with full delight.
And by a sweet delusion he
And herds of oxen wandering low;
And cares not farther to proceed;
And ditties of the steppe she loved.
And far removed from rumour vain;
And fields my joys have ever been;
And glittering simpletons beside;Amid sly, pusillanimous
And grant success to labour long;
And in her conversation drawled.
And he who, jealousy disarmed,
And dames of fine organisations,
And chattering loud sit down to dine.Ceased for a space all chattering.
And comfort of each country dame,
And crossed with trembling hand the maid."I am in love," her whispers tell
And ease the tortures of the heart--
And impiously should declare,
And flooded all the level ground.
And from the misty woodland nigh
And grant his weary bones their rest
And grown more curious by far
And in her hand a French romance.
And meditative from the spot
And in her languid bosom raise
And my dark soul to light was brought;
And is all light within destroyed?
"And is it long since back he came?
And make a dark existence shine
And like his shadow dogged his life,
And long internal agitation
And love's delicious diadem
And reached, with nought his mind to engage,
And is it true and not a jest,
And is it true her garland bright
And many a caravan on high
And more imagination teems.
And naked uniformity.
And natural benevolence,
And now 'tis night, the guardian moon
And now his youthful heart desires
And now, I mournfully confess,
And sermon--but in that dread hour
And led me off to church with song."
And many another slily sneered;
And many a day thereafter laid
And marking Tania's agitation,
And reads with rapid eager eye
And now philanthropy his soul,
And past the threshold of decay,
And on the footstool sitting down
And read our newspapers scarce ever,
And rest from bygone days of strife.But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,
And ringing wine-glasses are plied.
And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.I like this word exceedingly
And lo! where lies a marble tomb
And marvels deemed he thus should view.
And may fall headlong any time.
And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!
And shall adopt some new caprice.
And shorter had the days become.
And she at last hath us deceived;
And showed with an uncertain light
And supercilious dames she glides,
And the dark fringe of men, like frames
And tears of reconciliation:
And the suspicious veteran old,
And silent as the maid Svetlana
And solitude and calm delight.
And soon Oneguine's door beside
And spur my spirit's torpid mood!
And starting suddenly doth say:
And stupid censors passionate;
And that too often we receive
And then a cup of coffee drank,
And such unconsciously he led,
And sulked in silent indignation;
And the conviction soon arose,
And that a bottle sealed with tar
And the recesses of my mind
And the extent of his caprice;
And the sagacious Triquet back
And the cast-iron statuette
And the young damsel from the town,
And then made merry pope and guest,
And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
And then with blind credulity
And thou, youth's early inspiration,
And thus secures the prey we seek.
And thus unto her nurse did say:"Nurse, 'tis so close I cannot rest.
And tiresome rogues ridiculous
And town and friends forgotten quite.This northern summer of our own,
Before the altar, lo! the pair,
And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?'Twas eve. 'Twas dusk. The river speeds
And not a speck of dirt descried.
And oh! what verses, what delights,
And saying this Vladimir drained
And stoves of various shapes abound.
And secretly their views expound.
And stay whose length none recollects.
And that unrivalled paragon,
And the Skatenines, aged pair,
And the bad book accompanies.
And to these letters and these tears.
And swifter than the swallow's flight.
And the heart's agitated dreams.
And the kind-hearted servitors:
And the world met her smilingly,
And what the old man might bequeath.And in reality one day
And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
And visit many a foreign clime,
And you, O maids immaculate,
And the young girl appeared before
And the young revellers of past times
And wholly occupied his day--
And thy inebriating wave
And to Oneguine far away
And where tempestuous love's desires,
And where the billows hoarsely raise
And where the admirable streams
And wished to say to him farewell.
And, by the light the moonbeams gave,
Another could her woe assuage
Another could her heart engage,
Another his betrothed was given;
Aside she casts her veil of gauze
And triumphs in career erotic.
And turned to leave immediately,
And where may be her sister now?
And two old pines their branches spread--
And unto whom we all allude
And watch her eye's full glance to meet.
And wheresoe'er thy footsteps err,
And wild among them grew her words--
And with his lot in life content,
As lordly mansions ought to be,
And wild festivities among
Anew the flames of passion start
Anicia soon appears, the door
Announcing to him dinner-time.
Appear attuned to softer chords;
Around the carriage of the pair--
Appeared, Don's effervescing boast,
Arrange without the least delay--
As formerly the shepherd sits
Are turned upon her. All combine
As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
As in a garden when I grew,
As in her heart the thought sank home,
As men who much had done that day.
Barely to draw her breath she seems,
And wisely gallops to the hill.
Around my stanzas incomplete
As Winter in their purity,
As if impossible it were
As many entertainments be!
As once, to fill the rapid page
At a great feast against desire,
As to a worthy man and good!But sad is the reflection made,
Assistance ever will extend,
At Russ she was by no means clever
At fifty who relief obtained
Assemblies oligarchical
At Larina's abode produced
At eventide would hither come,
At forty suffered from the gout,
At last my father gave his blessing,
At times, if only once a week,
At early morn returns the maid
At last is shrunk and withered quite?
At the front gates, but in brief space
At times my reason almost bends,
At last the author!" cries Mamma.
Athwart the snow four paces came--
At least by show of sympathy;
Before it ran a stream. Behold!
At least their accents and their words
At seven in summer rose from bed,
At morn an icy bath within
At thirty who was married well,
At times talk nonsense with design;
At twenty who was prig or swell,
Attentive to the heart's first beating,
At times to silence would resort,
At this time almost understood.
At times three words to him addressed
At womankind he growled a curse,
Aurora's ruddy rays of light--
Avowal then 'twas time to pray,
Authors replete with sacred fire
At table she was sitting by
Baggage is heaped up in a mound,
Await the long-delayed caress.
Back to his regiment must roam.
Away, Tattiana, hath been ta'en.
Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,
            Baratynski
Barking, young ladies' osculations,
Because he yawned at the bare view
Because my lord, in battles maimed,
Behind the mountain sank the moon.
Behold! beside their dwelling groups
Awaiting on the shore I roam
Attend in male attire arrayed.On this artistical retreat
Attentive be unto my rhymes
Attentive listened to his speech,
Awhile this beauty captivated,
Attentive to the echoing sound,
Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
Avenge himself in proper style.
Beats that of friends and relatives:
Before you agonized to die--
Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?
Awakens secret merriment
Awhile sound conversation seems
Away! and cease to ring their praise
Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
Aye bids ye in some way or other--
Bard of the "Feasts," and mournful breast,
Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
Because her passion wanted art,
Because in singleness of thought
Before her straight with roguish eyes.
Before him her wild game of chance.
Because she was so innocent,
Become a faithful wife and e'en
Bedding is laid out and to all
Before him red roast beef is seen
Because he could not gourmandise
Because a member I became.Once more to idleness consigned,
Before such fond simplicity
Behind the mill. Meantime ye see
Before whom once in solitude,
Begins to talk of this and that,
Behind her a grave general.
But first permission did request
But from the Muses' loftiest height
Bear gone--she at the threshold placed;
And in a whisper did repeat:
And in the bathroom did command
And in the Summer Garden rove.
And judgment which unsteady veers
And kindness Tania was impressed,
And irritates the appetite.
And leaning 'gainst the portal closed
And leans upon the monster's arm,
And nothing more important sees;
And others rise ephemeral!
And soon the friendly troop hath fled.They in a peaceful life preserved
And life and fate in turn selected
And like Napoleons each of us
And of the attic. Honestly,
And modest, cheerful as the morn,
And oft at eventide a throng
And roofs near morn blanched o'er with snow;
And soon Lel hovered o'er her head.
And the cold beauties of the season:
And oft in whispers would impart
And pallid nature trembling grieves,
And our swift troikas never tire;
And solitude and calm delight,
And physic bring with mournful face,
And so Tattiana was her name,
And the far mountains daintily
And thou, persistent to the end,
And the lone secret of her heart,
And then "monsieur" supplied her place;
And then the stanzas of my theme
And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;
And the young ladies fortunes told,
And usually despised it too),
And where Thalia softly dreams
And then she soon 'twixt work and leisure
And views amongst themselves advance
And what will Destiny concede?"Farther Tattiana's walks extend--
Are not with elegance impressed.
And thoughts of Olga first impressed
And thus ancestral dust reveres.
And when her violence reviewed--
And with emotional delight
Aroused Tattiana from her bed.
And who the rent-roll of his race
And would by candlelight arise.Romances pleased her from the first,
And, heaving a regretful sigh,
Angel or fiend malevolent.
And youthful madness, youthful fires.The gulf between them was so vast,
Another bard with art divine
As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,
Around her neck, now violently
As Saadi anciently averred--
As cyphers others to appraise,
As a babe's slumber, or the light
As a poetic life serene,
As butterflies to blossoms cling.
And like a palisade flit by.
And lonely through the forest creeps.""Is she in love?" quoth one. "With whom?
And my Eugene the path must trace--
And our successors soon shall drive
And my romance's open theme
And rapid whirl of many feet,
And vanish like a bird in air.Full many a lovely star hath night
And she despite herself would waste
And these the attentive maid observed
And thus it is 'twould cause me pain
As if with eider-down is filled.
As if it were some funeral feast.
As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
And she to whom my lyre would fain,
And since I pulled thee by the ear--
And what she from the cards inferred.
And yet oblivion forbade.
As deaf and silly doth remain,
Another with cock's head appeared,
As with innumerable fires.
As in a thicket's humble shade,
Assemble from the neighbourhood:
As the reflection of his age,
"At Larina's."--"Hem, that is queer!
At first for books was disinclined,
But Lenski, I should be so glad
At first such contradictions wrought
At last became a ruined man.
At the same hour she oped her eyes
At prisoner's base she never played.
Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
Attentive listened to the lad.But more the passions occupy
Beneath her parents' eyes the maid
Away her golden earrings tore;
Become alarmed. So never mind!
Beneath the flag of Quietude,
"Boredom, my friend, behold the ill--"
But Lenski, having no desire
But contrary to her advice
Bard of the Finnish maiden young.
Basins and jugs--well! everything
Before a cold indifferent crowd,
Before a fire which feebly glows
Before he eighteen years attained.Since Eugene in that solitude
Before the dregs they shall divine
Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,
But finally grew bored by her.
Being from hell or heaven sent,
Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
Beneath the sheltering oak tree's shade
Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,
Bouyanoff courted. She refused.
But Tania just as in a dream
But Tania's heart is not at ease,
But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead--
But now in her effulgence pale
But grown familiar side by side
But in the drawing-room all appeared
But lights incendiary flames
But one buffoon unhappy deemed
But tell me what am I to do?
But plainer girls they oft had seen.
But ultimately doth approach.
But presently she tried to read;
But that Princess Pauline of old,
But they draw near. Before them, lo!
But time flies and she doth forget
But proudly in his song preserved
But where Melpomene doth rave
But soon she altered all her ways,
Doth in us or our names appear,
And spectacles, his knitting staid
And the lime alley's twilight dim
And the newcomers welcome bade.
And the saloon threw open wide;
And viewed the door with cunning eye.All bustle when he makes a sign:
And what from its recess appears?
And when for Olga nurse arrayed
And wildly waves its arms and storms;
Anticipating woe she pined,
And where at last his bones repose
Another visit hastes to pay.
As in the timid forest deer,
By Providence's dark decree!
Appear; along the road of Tver
At an old aunt's they had arrived
At neighbouring hospitalities.
But Summer swiftly fades away
Balconies, lion's heads on doors,
Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
Before whose inexperienced sight
But still more stupid did appear
But with her elder sister I
But, her own room in memory,
By bee and butterfly which pass.'Twas she who first within his breast
Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,
But wherefore not?--'Tis pleasant, nice,
But, as he never opened them,
Boulevards, belfries, milliners,
But soon their choice seemed to her mind
By Heaven in lieu of happiness.Habit alleviates the grief
"But, _matushka_, to Moscow you
But when the winter season came
By Tania, smoothing his peruke,
By absence who hath chilled his love,
Came forth in all her magic sheen.The snow descends and buries all,
But you must both be quite tired out!
By rank as settled by the State.
By neighbouring families bewept,
Dark clouds before the north wind fly;
Deep in the greenwood far away?Arising with the morning's light,
Delicious nature, thee I fly,
_Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
Desire to rule ye may observe
From hence engrossed in thought profound
By children and by faithful wife
By computation) it is like
Can we not stealthily make out
By their own horses, not the post--
Charming with grave simplicity.He sang of love--to love a slave.
By what idea or observation
Deeming himself a veteran scarred
Carried away by ecstasy,
Compassion now or wrath inspires
_Come to my golden palace, dear_!
Conceitedly on Tania fair,
Condemned to exile dire by fate,
Conduct Tattiana constantly,
Constant affection intertwined
Contemplate her sad reverie.
Corset and album and Pauline,
Could taste the pleasures of the road.
Customs by ages sanctified,
"Delighted."--"When?"--"This very night.
Descried before me suddenly!
Devoured them with an eager zest.
Domestic life attracts me still,
Even beneath her parents' roof
Dreamed in the future man and wife.
E'en from her cradle's earliest dream,
"Enough to see one winter's end;
Enough, enough, conclude thy lay--
Farewell! thou golden days of love!
Ever receive with kindly hearts
Feeling in others much esteemed.With smiling face he Lenski hears;
For God's sake, Lenski, don't begin!
Drive on! the city barriers hoary
Exceptionless as no rule is,
Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
Euphonious, though I know a spice
Examined, mended, newly found
Exist--that their immortal band
For Moscow fops and Circes each
For dolls, e'en from her earliest years,
For every loyal Russian breast!
Existence without wife or friends,
Cousin, rememb'rest Grandison?"
Cried the old dame with anguish filled:
Debate commanded ample food--
Each gave Tattiana's arm a nudge
Each gust of temper, silly word,
Eugene, more tolerant than this
Endowing us from out her store
Entrusted all to her sincerely,
Eugene would speak regarding these.
Even amusing fools we miss
Examine her from head to foot.
Existence calmly sped along,
Fair source of every fine idea,
Feeling is silly, dangerous.
Found out the secret how at pleasure
Glides with a more luxurious ease;
Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,
First reconciled and then content;
For our Automedons are fire
Fragments of northern poetry,
For folly's dues thou hadst to pay.Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,
Forgive the fever youth inspires,
"Good-bye, Oneguine, I must go."--
For the impatient chief instead.
Forgot the world, the noisy ball,
Friends of the sons of every land,
From apprehension of the cost,
From boxes or from stalls in rows.To the assembly her they bear.
Gifts such as these alone could prize,
Gallop, mazurka, waltzing--see!
Goddess of lovers' tender sighs.
In her friends' albums, time had been,
Behind, of glasses an array,
Behold her downcast eyes which glow,
"Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;
Behold the dames who once were fine
Behold! green tables are brought forth,
Behold! orthography despising,
Behold! than polished floor more nice
Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,
Behold! the world's opinion!
Beneath a cross and shrubbery.
Beneath her downy pillow placed,
Beneath her roaring opened wide:
Believed, the people's wisdom weird,
Beneath his lips' devouring kiss.
Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
Besides the hobbies of a spouse
Better than Chateaubriand did
Between the blanc-mange and the roast;
Beyond this may attempt to write_.Infallibly you there will find
Between the stalls, along the toes;
Bevies of treacherous maidens young;
Bouyanoff whisked off Poustiakova.
Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
Beneath the table-cloth of white,
Beside his Olga doth he grieve,
Beside the stormy sea one day
Besides, a duellist well-known
Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
Blest be the labours of the light,
Born of a babbler in a loft
Both day and night he now must pass
Both ducks and geese in plenty bred
Both for the nails and for the tushes.
Both natural and truthful seemed.
Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
Bouyanoff too, my cousin, wore
Bows and the scrape of many feet,
But send your grandson before long."No answer all that day was borne.
Beneath the window-sill his bed,
Bright day will then begin to burn,
Beside our youthful heroine fair,
Beside the thundering abyss
Between myself and my Eugene,
But the dark sepulchre I may
Bullets are down the barrels pressed,
But I await thee: scarce alive
But borne in spirit far away
But why are your cheeks whitening?"
Blank, unapproachable and cold.
Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
But I was sharp in times gone by.
But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
By dull insensibility,
Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fetes;
Behold! the moon was shining bright
Believe me, of my present shame
Beside a nameless rivulet,
Beneath the silver of the moon
Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain--"
Behold, the crowd begins to stir,
Beside the cup she sang her rhymes
Beyond the city-barriers haste.Thou also, reader generous,
Books he abandoned like the fair,
But I abandoned their array,
But I must now employ my Muse
But trusted the ideal she wrought?--
But one thought only filled his mind,
But look you--ah! do not refuse."
But scarce had sleep's soft witchery
But, to his uncle's mansion flown,
By Olga's hand distributed
Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
Both were expectant of the hate
Both were of passion satiate
But on the third of grove and mead
But Eugene, hating litigation
But finally he oped his eyes
But praised be God! in health art thou!
But still remembrance to him clings,
But Eugene, incontestably,
But Fortune cast our lots apart
But gray Phillippevna the door
But in his heart dissatisfied,
But it grew late; he must not stay;
But lo! already the moon's light
But what astonished do I find
But round the hostess scintillate
But nought for this Tattiana cares.The break of day she doth not see,
But sits in bed with air depressed,
By the coarse wit of worldly hate;
By visions who was ne'er deranged
By whom the youthful bard was slain?"--
Callous to all he seemed to be.Ye miracles of courtly grace,
Command him not to say a word--
Carried a truth divine away;
"Command me, darling, what you choose"--
Dressing as quickly as he can,
Commence a new career in life
Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,
Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
"Do not--you might--suspicious be;
For o'er a word to fashion known,
For consecrate to me he fell
Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
But boldly I myself resign:
But I perceive thou dost not heed--"
But I, in love, was mute and dull.The Muse appeared, when love passed by
But I--what is all this to me?
But at her shriek ran forth with noise
But followed the strict rules of art,
But home his body to despatch
But it grew late; cold blew the gale;
But now my mind is desolate,
But sweeter in a midnight dream
But turn we once more to our dame.
"But tell me, nurse, can you relate
But this is my advice, 'twere best
"But," cried Zaretski in amaze,
By liberties or loose or light.And yet the city's flower was there,
Can scarce in sweetness be a match.Well, if your pistol ball by chance
Cocked hat and melancholy brow.
From you too Eugene took to flight,
But now a question in this wise
But sweeter still it is to arrange
But to Vladimir Eugene saith:
But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts
But the date subsequently changed
"But which, my dear?--In days of yore
But would not look at Cicero.
By recklessness amuse or shame
Dark was the valley and the wood
Delusions of a mind untried,
Grant that I err not on the road."
Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,
Conscious of death approximate,
Deep in our mother Earth's chill breast!"Tattiana's eyes with tender gleam
Could not eclipse her neighbour's light."And is it," meditates Eugene.
Enough! my pack is now unslung--
Felled a calumniator base!
Descends, the order Guillot gives,
Endless conjectures all propound
For I myself was thirteen quite;
For him an honourable grave,
Frequent and rapid doth his glance
From hall to yard and garden flies,
God save his soul eternally
Doth on the billiard table rest,
Doubt and uncertainty decide:
Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
Even the rosy wafer dries
'Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Hard by the window took her place."--
Fly frequent to my solitude,
From mere vacuity of mind
Great sacrifices for his sake!
Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,
Had killed me had the like been told."
Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
Having a trusty staff bestowed,
By indolence and languor fired
By such allusions scandalous,
Calm and without embarrassment,
By waters shining tranquilly,
Can she have been a moment gone
Comfort and succour to the poor,
Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
Do agitate his late repose.
Doth seem to him the festal scene.
Doth his brow wretchedness declare
Had let fall many a bitter tear:
Detest him for a brother slain?
E'en as the poet says he leant.
Eventually petrify
Familiar to him long ago.
For was it not her duty to
Gazing into his face, she said:
Eugene directs the trusty man
From henceforth I confide to thee!
Glory with which our history teems
Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
Have entered never to return.
From her half-open vest of night.
Had not yet withered his young breast.
Full of exasperating thought.
Good governs all! The hour draws nigh
Grew like a lily pure and white,
Had bid her sigh for without hope--
Handbook of fashionable phrase
Happy who thereto can unite
Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:
Harvests of souls unceasingly
Hath she a fitting phrase selected?
Have latterly vexatious grown;
He a polite reply doth scrawl.
Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
But could not. Then she questioned him:--
But fashionable hatred's flame
But lonely beneath Finnish skies
But shall depict the touching scene
But my Tattiana's eyes were dry.
By flattery and lover's art--
But since to the backdoor they led
But this a heinous crime appeared
But promise of our meeting gave,
But stop! I will present thee, if
But who in that choice company
By an _obrok's_ indulgent rate:
By time
Callous to all on earth become--
Can hearty welcome give alone.
Cannot they amicably smile
Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,--
Confront thy fated torturer!Love's pangs Tattiana agonize.
Deliberate approach of guests
Did seem to greet the youthful year;
Entranced me by some mystic tale.
Depart in peace and friendly live?
Descended swift in turbid streams
Dies suddenly: of heirs alone
                    Dmitrieff
Distracted by her grief appears
Dreaming herself the heroine
Ere crimson stains their hands defile,
Do we foresee in troubled dreams
Do we alone our losses mourn
Enclosing pictures of fair dames.
Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
Epicurean philosophers,
Ere this but one brief moment beat
Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,
Eugene at first began to dream,
Extinct the flame which once had fired;
Extinguished ashes do not blaze--
Fantastic images shall swarm
For evermore had disappeared.
But finally in wedlock bind.
But if my lot unfortunate
But memory like a serpent's tooth
But nowhere can she find repose,
But now--none heeds the monument
But suddenly all changed around!
By the old lime-tree or the rill,
But will not modify a tittle--
Byron's capricious phantasy
Canto the First of this romance.
Careless of fame his spirit high
Can lower depths beyond remain?
Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim
Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
Could in a humble sphere despise,
Could in romantic mantle drape
Deep in the distant province rude,
Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
Discovered much absurdity,
Do all things which to mirth incline.
Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
E'en hopeless egoism's dark shape.
Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows--
Extended--haunt which Dryads love.
Flew to collect his rural tax;
For savage speech, uncouth and strange,
For the first time the hammer clicks.
For evermore is separate.
For journalistic deglutition
Go, on the Neva's bank appear,
For there he left a mournful trace.
For which no springtime shall appear?
Forgotten in the village lone,
Four deadly paces do they span;
Free, I renewed the idolatry
Fresh cause of quarrel then I'll find,
Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!
Go hear the rustling of the oaks
Her bow was easy, unreserved.Ah no! no faintness her attacked
From Gottingen inspired he came,
From happy inspiration flow,
From gales a hill behind was seen;
From shades of the relentless past.
He called upon me Christmas Eve--
From whose analysis minute
Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
God knows! The very trace is lost.'Tis sweet the foe to aggravate
He drops his pistol silently.He on his bosom gently placed
Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
"Had he been long here, and where from?
Guillot behind a pollard stood;
He left _you_ first, and I must own
Hath whiled the road's monotony,
He finally lost all delight
He took the room wherein the old
"He promised here this day to ride,"
He to the festival repairs,
He wanders in his indolence;
He was in error; for Eugene
He witnessed tenderly and moved
    Griboyedoff
Hath the bard, by indifference blest,
He was no more! The youthful bard
He brought from mystic Germany
He conversation would have led--
He fixedly upon her stares--
He gazed upon the clock which showed
He long should have been on the road.He rings in haste; in haste arrives
He salutary rules poured forth?
He was a dangerous fool indeed.
He was an honest gentleman,
He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
He with an innocence extreme
He with his little maiden played,
He deemed his friends but longed to make
He enters: to the mill he drives:
He has returned, say in what guise?
He deemed of human life the goal
He had excepted from the ban:
He enters: rapidly discussion
He is not there: I am not known:
He racked his brains to find its clue
He oft upon his lips would curb,
He wakes--they with a letter come--
He reads at random, reads in vain.
He thought to write, but labour long
He was a dear delightful fool--
He felt the laudable desire
"He hath neglected us of late."--
He sang of life's fresh colours stained
He kindled his poetic flame.
He lies, upon his forehead death,
He sang of separation grim,
He shunned those parties boisterous;
He would not that a man ye slay
Her garden, and those books of hers,
He writes upon his parents' tomb,
He's a straightforward little chap."
He wrote ('tis the romantic style,
He's a freemason, so we think.
Hearing the fatal perfidy?
Heaved an involuntary sigh
Heedless of your despairing cry?Eugene, his pistol yet in hand
Her glance how wild yet genial!
Her heart how full of gentleness,
Her brow she did not e'en contract
Hears not my importunity!
Heart would not throb albeit in jest--
Her heart importunately turns.
Heavy his heart with anguish grew;
Her path across the plain doth keep--
Her feet the earth beneath her press!
Her head upon her breast declines
Her heart more loudly and more fleet.She hesitates, in doubt is thrown--
Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,
Her amorous experience
Her antiquated mode of speech,
Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
Her cap of tulle still ever wears:
Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
Her girlish gaiety and sport.
Her lips where light smiles come and go!
Her money counted, and designed
Her passion's faithful counterpart,
Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
Her locks were of a golden hue,
Her movements, voice and figure slight,
Her promptings unto law did make,
Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,
Her sisterhood delights the young
Her spacious fields and shady groves,
Her steppe-like beauties I peruse
Enchanted by the moon's pale beam.
Delighted much his former ways
Demands that I translate for you
Did not their lips with foreign speech
Did they not all the Russian tongue
Doth love's incautiousness in her
E'en as the presence of a snake,
Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
Doth in her gentle eye appear.
Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go--
Doctors and women, sobs and groans.But, howsoe'er his lot were cast,
Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:
Enhances love in estimation
Enchanting, but unwittingly,
Ennui can in the country dwell
Enough! with tranquil spirit I
Eternally to imitate
Faces which we meet everywhere
Having for money's sake alone
For a fictitious misanthrope,
For law I _far niente_ take
For on their brows I trembling read
For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,
For rural solitude and dreams,
For summer to the country flown,
For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?I have known beauties cold and raw
Funeral amateurs abound!
From public and from private ties,
Had come both friends and enemies--
Hath tranquilly in turn attained,
Have one by one all withered grown
He found him on the table laid,
He knew not how to spend his life.
He now a full possession takes,
He took no more the slightest heed;
He who economy abhorred,
Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
Her weary eyes are filled with tears--
Herds low, and under night's dark veil
Him a disquietude did seize,
Eugene designed with me to start
Even as the love of children dear.
Fortune the poet had repaid.
Excruciate the heart and late
For a protracted space of time.
From her my lips shall learn the tongue
For ever carps, condemns, pursues?
Gazing on Lenski's corse did stand--
God grant I meet not at a ball
Good-night." Behold! she is alone!
Had finished life amid his sons,
Have e'er a precious tress consigned,
His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,
Here bottles stand in close array,
Have felt love's agitated kiss
Having this mournful document
Her the ideal which he dreamed,
Her suit before my parents pressing:
Her utterances ever heard,
His book-shelf instantly doth drape
His breast was riddled through and through,
His mournful heart no peace could find,
I am--in love--you know--don't tell!"
Had perished a creative mind,
Had to compose in secret rhymes,
Happy who timely grew mature,
Hath gradually learnt to endure;
Have echoed to eternity.
Her toilette's antiquated style,
He ne'er shall hear Time's eulogy,
He perished. Where his troubled dreams,
He who life's frosts which early wrung
Her eyes no saucy glance address,
Her features no grimaces bleared;
Her tresses curled in fashion saw,
His butting horns in anger bent,
Her manners were deliberate,
His relative and friend as well.
His wife approaches, with him leads
"I am in love, nurse! leave me now."
I on my chosen hero dote;
Her with a smile old women greet,
Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;
"Here, he resides with Simeon.
His travels like all other things
Herein my portrait should detect,
His bit with foam besprinkled o'er,
His vanity first let us pique
Hid in the gondola's dark shade,
His lyre, to silence now consigned,
Horror of sinfulness and shame,
How! from the waste of steppes unseen,"--
"How came you then to wed a man?"--
How sick to death his uncle lay
How thy hands burn!"--"Dear nurse, I'm well.
Howl like a dolt: 'tis meant for me!
I can't translate the adjective.
I have dreamed many a vision fair
I promised!--Did I so?--Well, there!
I ask, all ye who poets are,
I cannot help it I declare,
I have endured without respite.
I mourn, but tears I cannot shed--
I can't conceive a little dear
I know that Parny's tender pen
I should alarm our friendship tried:
Invigorate imagination
His care unto his pistols' plight,
His character attracted me.
His constant soul could ever tire,
His neighbour's lowly tomb and mourned
His son is married, just conceive!""And he--but of him presently--
I must resign myself, in sooth;
Hope with her fascinating power
I slumber much, a little read,
I thank thee for thy joyfulness,
I the same admonition make.
I uttered to my lady fair
I yield for splendid vanities,
I yield with a low reverence;
I'll pass beneath the firmament,
Imagination's sacred fires,
His weary head declined at rest,
Horror! had she not better stay
"How often in thine arms I lay;
I formerly admired her much
"Ideal," he had drowsy grown.
How with thy medal I would play,
I like the difference to express
I mean my name not to repeat."
I'll sprinkle thee with holy water.--
If thou wert sitting by my side,
Impressionable for an hour,
I thank thee. In thy company,
I write, and anguish flies away,
"I'm happy, say, is it not so?"--
I've scanned it with a jealous eye,
Impelled by Spring's dissolving beams,
In old age life is weariness!"
His ditties were as pure and bright
His energy and impotence.And numerous pages had preserved
His friendship I acquired just then;
His hand, and fell. His clouded eye
His harp beneath that sky had rung
His hate by slander, and who spends
His housekeeper was wont to scold,
His heart reciprocated still
His uncle, busy man indeed,
His immorality of mind
His inner consciousness laid bare,
His name: the tenderness of home
His song, when still he slumbered deep,
How oft beneath the moonbeams pale
I was incensed and he was sad.
"How Tania grows! Doth it appear
How oft the kindly Muse away
How oft to the Crimean shore
How sweet a dream your memories raise!
Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn
I am acquainted with fresh care,
"I call to witness God on high--"
I cannot tell the reason why,
I cannot understand. But lo!
I will descant on love's sweet dream,
I guard it as a holy thing,
I never should have seen your face
I had found my predestinate,
I owe the censorship a little.
I was half silly with affright.
I'm o'er it ever pondering.
If but to lighten Time's dull rate,
I yield the fruit of work severe.
If not, the money I will lend."
If they but heard domestic loads
Impressed him in the least degree,--
Imprudent prattle of the heart,
In bullets, sabres, and in fight.His malady, whose cause I ween
If the fond hope I could have fanned
In Russ her love made manifest,
In age the memory gets worse,
Impelled by zeal for moral worth,
Imperial portraits hang around
In bud of promise incomplete,
In charming fashion mutilate?
In clouds of steam above perceive.
In coach or post-cart duly placed
In correspondence been allowed.
In pages of a love narration
In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:
In duel having killed his friend
In haunts of fashion where each day
In many things had changed his life--
In monsters and fair dames was rich;
In one of thine enchanting lays
In motley and amusing chase.
In country solitude you mope,
In one he doth accounts behold,
In hopes of everlasting fame
In poor Moldavia cast her lot,
In rhyming I show laziness.
In solid, unpretentious style,
In some a willing martyrdom.
In that morass where you and I
In the beginning of this lay,
In the dawn of existence drear.
In the meantime her spirit sinks,
In the world's mortal revelries,
In thy imagination warm,
Incessantly his chains to break."I still a complication view,
In time I'll give ye without fail
In times gone by thy bare command--"
In vehicles surcharged with freight;
In worldly din or solitude
    Indifferent and sedate,
Indifferent he became to all,
I heard thy voice's resonance
His transports were quite maidenly,
Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment
Hopeless are all the first, I own,
How dark the night is getting though!
"How now, Oneguine, yawning still?"--
How the young imp on Tania doted!
I Apuleius gladly read
I am in love, my hour hath come!
I will not wed, and ever weeps
In fact, some people were assured
"I celebrate a comrade young
I feel thou wast by God sent down
I have it. Lo! the very thing!
I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
If they were similar in aught.
I mused: perhaps the matter's squared--
"I won't detain you; but 'tis hard
Idolatry of liberty,
Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?
In Olga's face no life's displayed.
Imagine! Here alone am I!
Impelled to union with his own
In the meantime the mill inspects.
Immersed in melancholy thought,
Impatient waits the close of day,
In a lax or informal way,
In former years thus did not I
In consultation stand aside--
In idleness and tranquil joy
In love's campaigns Oneguine heard
In mist profound all yet is hid.
In the beginning, cold and mute,
In the unfettered hours of leisure
In spite of common sense we're wont
In spring-time, heard the cygnet's note
In the Lyceum's noiseless shade
In the first place, say, am I right?
In the recesses what hath stirred
In thee, thou world of empty bliss.In groups, official striplings glance
In their sterility of prattle,
In what he merely acquiesced.
In your young days and also mine),
Interrogation to denote.And my Tattiana now began
In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.
In vain was youth by us received,
In vain my anxious eyes appeal;
In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
In winter time would often come.
"Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know
Into accounts would sometimes look,
Indites an inconsiderate scroll
Inflict annoyance and distress
Inseparable soon they be.
Inhabited the country, clad
Inspired him with disgust and so
Inspired but weariness intense;
Inspired by whom this tenderness,
Into the chamber where he slept
Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
Into the cups already sped
Into the district then to boot
Into the lonely house she went,
Into the starry night extend.
Into the study of the boy
Is it a dream, and can it be?
Is it not true? the objects fair,
Into the tangled garden goes
Introduce verse in conversation.
Is ever ready to proclaim
Is it for long?"--"Ma chere cousine!"
Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,
"Is he known to you?"--"Yes and No."Wherefore regarding him express
Is it that ardent souls of flame
Is the world to him sealed and dumb?
Is it that human restlessness
Is no more cherished amongst men.
Is still condemned in love to be;
"Is he the same or grown more wise?
Is waning. Yonder valley deep
It carries of antiquity
It gradually possessed his mind;
It may be that his martyred shade
Its insignificance I know
It now to investigate is time,
Its cold unfeeling sentences;
Just at this moment I cannot.
Its passions and its modes of thought.The butt of scandal having been,
Its splendour and its blandishments,
Its waters to the neighbouring vale.
Ivan Petrovitch still a gaby,
Jackdaws on every spire--in scores.
Just at that time his father died,
Light sallies without coxcombry,
Bright blazed the window of the place,
Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
"Bring dinner now without delay!"Upon the table in a trice
Britzka, kibitka, or in coach.
Bruin is marching at her back!She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
Bringing his partner corpulent
Buried in meditation deep,
But Adam Smith to read appeared,
But Lenski madrigals ne'er wrote
But Eugene long hath left the press
But fools--their calumnies and sneers"--
But Eugene was by fate preserved,
But Lord! from friends deliver me!
But Olga would not such peruse.
But by degrees the crowd begin
But competition I abjure
But as to fighting--'twill appear!
But by fantastic dreams distraught,
But cannot stand the northern cold.
But dinner-time comes. Two and two
But enough! Now, 'tis my intent
But finally she softly said:
But gazes on Oneguine's face
But he desired not to beguile
But now all doubt was set aside,
But I came not to adulate:
But I must add to what I write
But he who by the Muse was nursed
But better loved the soft repose
But cannot anyhow evade
"But death from him will be delight.
But if the truth I must relate,
But kindness from his eye had beamed
But my Oneguine the whole eve
But grant with magnanimity
But little warmth the fireplace lends,
But lo! his braggart neighbour hath
But man of sense and probity.He might his motives have narrated,
But merely to exasperate;
But now--my very blood congeals,
But lo! the friends to chat commence."How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
But now ridiculous a bit.Behold Sabouroff, whom the age
But now--what brings you to my feet?--
But my Tattiana, on my soul,
But no reply unto her made.
"But strange am I to happiness;
But of this love, e'en casually,
But say he was a genius who
But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
Despite the anguish of his breast,
But scarce had maids their saucers ta'en
But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
But somehow there shone in his look
But the indifferent princess,
But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
But was our friend Eugene content,
But the young unpolluted heart
But trembles, words he cannot find,
But tremor still her frame possessed,
But to the garden once again
But upon all that Eugene knew
But turning morning into night,
But when Tattiana's hand had ta'en
But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
By an avowal just as plain.
By his embarrassed dignity--
But, as I said, Zaretski mine
By daily life deteriorated,
By barren snow heaped up and bound,
Confessions which a trusting heart
But this adventure's consequence
But this amusement delicate
But trembling on the mirror dark
But who abandon it--as I
By Tolstoy's pencil marvellous,
But what a nuisance it will be,
But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
But, after mutual compliments,
But wretched who anticipates,
But ye to whom, when friendship heard,
By friendship how they were abused,
By love's inevitable flame.
By melancholy fogs concealed.
Certain misfortune near opined.
Cropped in the latest style his hair,
By night prepared for sorcery,
By the decree of Mighty Jove,
Careless of every social rule,
Charms more enduring in the end.
Can count the time without much fuss--
Cartel, or challenge to a fight,
Change of position had essayed,
Charming is your sincerity,
Chained to his bedside night and day
Come sing we in chorus
"Come," she cried, "sister, tell me e'en
Contend with knife and fork and platter,
Contented and with victuals stored,
Conventionality's dull tool--
Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
Corneille's majestic genius,
Crunching the morning snow she treads;
Curtly announcing for the fray
Danced the mazurka gracefully,
Deep into debt his father ran;
Dark shadows thicken--a dread cry
Delighted glances in return;
Delighted, almost sane in mind.But once more pensive and distressed
Despair and anger seize on me,
But now our hero we must leave
But I am now another's bride--
But deeming all this nonsense pure,
Device of rural minds acute!)Young maidens, fair maidens,
But at a later, sterile age,
Disperse yourselves, darlings,
Disport yourselves, maidens,
Develops and matures its powers,
Distinctly not its mechanism.
Do not excuse yourself. I read
Do me a favour and appear.
Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
Epistles of six sheets or near,
Diminishes as years decline.
Divinity without access
Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
Drunk as a fly; and thus the French
Dressed like a London dandy he
E'en for an instant find delight,
Dreaming perchance in weal or woe
Each other as the shore we climb!
Economy political,
Eight times the heroes of the fight
Either she saw not or ignored;
Either with him or thee in song,
Enamoured at her feet to fall.
Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,
Encountered punishment complete,
Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
Ere conversation could begin,
For treachery had done its worst;
Ere the bright messenger had set.
Eugene of course related nought,
Eugene was touched with sympathy;
Ever absorbed a maid so much:
Ever to hear the same replies
Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
Existence would not make a curse,
Finally tost his arms in air
Foeman or friend, I do aspire
Fearing his pupil to annoy,
For empty sound the rascal swore he
From Romulus unto our day.
For ever faithful will abide."
For ever with thy tattling lyre,
For ever your Tattiana leave.
For first "madame" his wants observed,
For him were but of little worth,
For long--for ever. To be sure
For my wild garden and bookcase,--
For, from the outset, 'twas unjust
For patience, reader, I must plead!
For which the poet agonized
For who imposture can endure,
From careless stanzas such as these,
Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,
Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,
From habit or maliciously,
From storms protection having sought,
From the dread pistol turn away.
Feelings which long had ceased to be
Enraptured was he if allowed
Espy him approaching,
For baseness of the spirit scorns,
For promises her feet reveal
For shame lift up the modest maid.
For twice you came to them and yet
Found the ideal of my youth,
Free, in the blossom of his spring,
Friends and companions,
Having lost all in life we prize.
Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
Furious he from the table rose;
Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.
God grant that all who herein glance,
Grasped a long knife and instantly
Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
Happy who quit life's banquet seat
Hateful the hollow world became,
Have my Oneguine--suddenly.
He "Benedetta" used to hum,
Give me just half a glass of wine--
Gently for pranks he would reprove
Gravely repeating to another
Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.
Guards fondly hope's uncertain dream.
Habit would bring indifference.
Hath mixed himself in the affair,
Glittered in a perspective long,
Had a deluded victim been
Had reconciled the pair anew!
Happy and glorious_. But this brings
Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!
Having performed his service truly,
Had much to do at home that day,
Had run across her path at speed,
Have shone as one of fashion's leaders.
Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
He called to mind Tattiana's grace,
He cared no longer there to stay,
He could in disputation shine
He daily in his drives drew near
He deemed his coming would inspire
He dragged her by a forest road
He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
He eyed her with a fond concern,
He feared the criminal might try
But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
But stares into the darkness deep.
But strength of mind and self-restraint
But such is not for me. I brood
But such is not my project now,
But that the eyes of every one
But were it not immoral I
But, when Oneguine's turn came round,
But thoughts meander far away--
But what results? His eyes peruse
But when two minutes she had sat,
But wilful, frivolous, and light.
But with austerity!--for you
But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
But with confused and bashful air,
But ye, O happy husbands, ye
But word for word his letter read.All is foreseen. My secret drear
But, knowing not the actual truth,
But, that life longer may remain,
By "belle Tattiana" to replace.Lo! from the nearest barrack came,
Capers applauds with clap of hands,
Conquer by passion and address,
Could not in that brief moment guess!
By Faublas in his youth was schooled,
By Olga stood, dejected quite
By a rich pie were occupied--
By fond illusions once possest
By every proper-minded wife,
By other thoughts be occupied.But I the products of my Muse,
Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
By many a lamp illuminate,
By poor Tattiana in the blues;
Calmly her eyes encounter his--
By the fine silver of the north.
Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,
Cast down his eyes in trepidation
Companion of my childhood's days.
By sympathy I have been driven.
Caught him and by the collar took
Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
Chief rascal, pot-house president,
Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
Crush and confusion in the hall,
Choosing a profitable trade,
Could not conceive how serious Grimm
Consisting of harmonious lays,
Caricatures he now designed
Calling to mind your icy look
Crushing and a confusing noise;
Cunning already to display
Cursing his own stupidity,
Custom the despot soon prevails.
Descends the bank with care extreme,
Daily of love in solitude.
Dally with a dishevelled tress
Dared calmly cleanse his nails 'fore him,
Departed, ordered out his horse
Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
Dark, unavailing reverie,
Depicted on your haughty face!
Deplores a most unworthy spouse
Desirous to annihilate
Displayed a noble rectitude--
Driving abreast three horses gray.
Delicious visions, jests and fights!Alas! my stomach it betrays
Describe in detail the affair,
_E sempre bene_, gentlemen!
Eloquent raver all-surpassing,--
Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
Detecting him the passing horse
Drank to her health in the first place,
Dreams with no continuity,
Dreading the world's remarks malign,
"Drive on!" the cheerful cry goes forth,
Employ your glasses constantly,
Engrave the ice with strident noise.
Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath
Drive out the cattle from their shed,
Epistle second, note the third,
"Enough, arise! for much we need
Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess
Fashion is there immutable,
Far from his Italy--his own.
Et cetera_; but nothing showed
For long he had endured them all.
Gliding in negligent career,
Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
Having once fixed your interest,
Espying, Eugene with a smile
Exclaiming, "We must change 'em all!
Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
Esteemed him much as the world goes.
Fair object of my guileless lay,
Far from the rest the pair would creep
Faithfully shall I now depict,
False confidence or doubt to impart,
Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
Eugene fell prostrate at her feet--
Even as Moscow, city proud.Confess, O ye who this peruse,
Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
Except one by the window placed
Fond declarations they invite
For maiden's hearing deemed unfit),
For your instruction here to tell
Flies past the porter to the stair,
Follow up love--a secret meeting
Found them in darkness side by side,
For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,
For our amusement ever made
For tallow, wood and other things
For visions of my childish years
From everything the heart held dear
Forgive me! Such the love I bear
From such digressions wholly free.
Full many a glance like lightning flash,
Gvozdine, Bouyanoff, Petoushkoff
Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;
For Ay is like a mistress fair,
For us, may be for many a year.
For otherwise--God only knows!
For the young poet they display.
Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
From the moist cork the bottle freed
Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
Girls in anticipation skip!
Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,
He read the unbelieving Bayle,
Free scope he yields unto his glance,
Gazing upon a note below.
Habit was given us in distress
Had rendered him an invalid;
Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!
Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,
He back as from a sudden blow?--
He bends his course to Talon's, where
He enters. High the cork arose
Hath fate apportioned unto thee
Haughty appear, subservient,
Having remarked Vladimir's flight,
He bending whispered in her ear
He found them in an almanac,
He _cannot_ give me happiness."
He enters. Ah! good news to-day!
He leisurely adorns for her.
He enters: in the hall a crowd,
He hies unto the "Boulevard,"
He in imagination saw
He knows Kaverine will repair.
He nears a spacious mansion's gate,
He obstinately will remain,
He round the billiard-table stalked,
He used to hate--and was no fool--
From first to last page to the rim.
He heard his soul's complaint within,
He from his Kalmuck horse did leap
He hath acquired the world's esteem
He in the early years of life
He is a charming youth and wise.
He laughs, although it aches from cold,
He knits his brows--'tis silent all.
He loved the simpleton to mock,
He mused: "I will her saviour be!
He offers her his murderous paw;
He on the conflagration frowned.
He ought to have conciliated
He roars, and "Ah!" Tattiana cries.
He sat, and then the livelong day,
He seemed for matrimony born.He was beloved: or say at least,
He still made love in a queer way;
He smiles, in laughter all combine;
He somewhat blushing would omit:
He takes his seat, concludes his game,
He there is master--that is plain;
He thought so, and existence charmed.
He usually was glad to see
He was no fool, and Eugene mine,
He was deceived. Just as before
He whom we sing to shall be made
He will delight you, I am sure,
He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
In silence shall I sit and yawn
He bowed to her nor silence broke,
He marmot-like did hibernate,
He well-nigh lost the use of sense,
He enters the saloon. 'Tis blank!
Heard he the truth? And thus she could--
Her Martin Zadeka in aid,
Her cheek of rosy loveliness
He yawns, averts his countenance,
"He's here! Eugene is here!
Her caps and night-dresses to mend.As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
Her Grandison was in the Guard,
Her Moscow cousin, often told
Her agitation and distress
Her nurse, who could have made a guess,
Her all in all did constitute;
Her foot was in my other hand.
Her cheek reclines upon her hand.Oh! who her speechless agonies
Her figure perfect grows with time!
Her hand for the cotillon prays.
Her handkerchief she loses now;
Her health, life's sweetness and its bloom,
Her husband was a bridegroom then,
Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
Her shoulders, breast and face to lave--
His ardent soul with full delight.
His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;
His furs are powdered on the way
Her house he enters, ghastly white,
Her sentimental verses all,
Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
Her smile and maidenly repose,
His sunken eye and aspect faint,
However cherries might abound,
His comedies, a noisy rout,
His daughter's book to ascertain
His double sashes and his grate,
His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
His wife was also mad upon
His entrance with Oneguine. "Ah!
His kneeling posture he retains--
How much is in that word expressed!
His shop, a night-cap on his head,
Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers
I by the button-hole seize fast
Her tears flow plentifully and
His Hellespont from bank to bank,
His course unto the running brook.
His intellect in close array.
His daily occupations, lo!
His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,
His soul by crash of music fired,
His spirit was intent upon.
However, the mazurka lacks
His tea with rum no more desired,
Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,
I long enough deceived have erred.
Hung like a print against the wall,
I also wandered there of old,
I long by ballets have been bored,
I sail upon my lake at times
"I with my friend intend to fight!"If he had only known the wound
I cannot longer wage concealed.
I know not if his heart felt pain
I know there's none more amiable.But from the interview what flowed?
I might to connoisseurs repeat
I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
In whispers low the neighbours said:
Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit
Her in the pitfalls which we place.
Her inmost soul had penetrated,
Her on a shaky bench sit down;
Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
Her shoulder--Olga swiftly came--
Here, drunk with his late victory,
His cup unto his maiden dear.
Herself not knowing well the reason,
Highways all Russia will unite
Himself transformed into a hack;
Him who inspired both love and awe,
Himself just like a greenhorn fell.
His arm he offers. Mute and sad,
His gusts should fertilize, amend,
His chambers close wherein confined
Hope to conceal and jealousy,
His fate shall presently decide.
His fist Oneguine fiercely shook
His footing on the treacherous rime
His friends and also enemies
His momentary loving glance
His mother from the door doth scold.
His ruffian bravery adored,
His head sinks slowly, rests upon
His pony sniffing the fresh snows
How bright and tender was his look,
How deftly could he transport feign!
How meekly then I heard you preach--
How perfect doth our epoch grow!
His own antagonists expert,
His valet brings him letters three.
His visit she had not awaited,
His wadded coat and cap with peak;
His watch, the sun in turn he views--
How I have erred and felt the rod!
How artless was the note which spoke
How bitterly he would malign,
How full of fire his speech would glow!
How like a poet was my chum
How soon he learnt deception's art,
Hurrah! it long ago was time!
I then resolved my heart to tear;
How soon to habits she conformed
How thoroughly her part she took!
I am not strong enough to state;
I blame not your behaviour--
In Tania's praise in pouch he brought,
I just hint, in parenthesis,
I thought--retirement, liberty,
In column blue the smoke doth rise;
I feel, allotted is my span;
I've had to make for having friends!But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
In jersey and in nightcap lay.
In winter by its blank and dim
I did not please you. Why pursue
I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.
I lift a warning voice because
I love you with a brother's love,
I long have ceased to offend the laws.Alas! life's hours which swiftly fly
I tremble lest my humble prayer
"I shall expire," Tattiana cried,
"I weep. And if within your breast
I love its furious delight,
I murmur not! Why mournfulness?
I loved you--what did I obtain?
I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
I would not part with finally;
I'm beaten in another matter;
I would your vigilance arouse,
Impatient, boiling o'er with wrath,
I've wasted in amusements vain,
I, after so much eloquence,
If ye but knew how dreadful 'tis
Ideas, desires and woes confuse
If Olga smilingly approve,
In Olga's and Tattiana's rooms
Impatiently the gallery stamps,
In Olga's album, youthful maid,
If the choice in my power were,
If cleverly or not I prate.But, O ye tomes without compare,
Imploring looks and mute complaint
If seriously he hath disease;
If the poor maiden could have guessed
Immersed in secret thought I stand
In aimless ease and far from strife,
In amorous flights when so inspired,
In books he saw nought to condemn
In country towns, where still it keeps
In boston and the game of age,
In course of time (the whole extent
In dreams and what the moon foretold
In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
In little maidens of thirteen?
In love adventures she was versed,
In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
In the unmoved, magnificent
In such an album with delight
In the lone garden and the lane?
Inseparable from our lot;
In love, although its tempests vex,
In melancholy loveliness,
In scenes like these it may be though,
In serious mood or dalliance
In much his conduct stigmatized;
In mother Winter's strange caprice.
In snow she sinks up to the knee;
Indeed, by force of magnetism
In spectacles and chestnut wig.
In the French language perfectly,
In this case quite mistaken was.
Incited by his stormy Muse
Inns there are none. Pretentious but
In truth he had the happy trick
In winter, when Night longer holds
Insensible her hand remains
Incorrigible rogue, doth go.
Inheritor of all his race.
How charming Olga's shoulders grow!
His recent glory he invokes.
His son and mortgages his lands.
His spirit sank with strange delight.
How like the billow I desired
Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
Honour and pride inflexible.
How empires store of wealth unfold,
Hymen's embarrassments, distress,
How flourish, why and wherefore less
How mean, how pusillanimous!
How pleasantly the evening jogs
However, Tania's letter reading,
I am not worthy them in aught;
I cannot tell on what pretence--
I have no leisure here to dwell,
I see you weep. Those tears of yours
"If the domestic hearth could bless--
If the raw product they possess
Inseparable they remained.
I envied sore the billows tall,
I love them, O my dear Elvine,
I love you--to what end deceive?--
If in the scenes of home I might
I once forgot for your sweet cause
I would desire my bride to be--
If his hot hand encountered hers,
If wife and children to possess
In company, or simply bowed,
In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!He was most gay. The happy date
In history he took no pleasure,
In life domestic see a string
In one great shout: she's mine! she's mine!"Mine!" cried Eugene with savage tone.
In one thing really did excel.
In the world's vortex my success,
In three weeks would arrive for them;
Indifferent was her future fate.
In the broad meadow a gay rout,
I married--now, I supplicate--
I say without poetic phrase,
In her affairs ne'er interfered,
In solitude or worldly din,
In love-lorn meditation sad.
In springtime on the meadows green,
In mud and mire to wallow deep,
In scarlet cap revolving glides.
In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
In true interpretation hates:
In winter on the fender bright,
Inside clink glasses, cries resound
Is ever ready with relief,
Is full of frigid jealousy,
It blew: it howled: till winter e'en
It may be that I did proceed--
Kept lingering on as loath to go,
Instructed jestingly the boy,
Into delicious bondage gave
Into thy hands my fate I yield!No answer! He another sent.
Intoned it, manuscript in hand.
Is ever thus. With frowning brow
Is it that I am now compelled
Is occupied with Olga fair,
Is once again made manifest.
It was a cheery, generous
Is petted by the Emperor?--
Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.No one the contrary will urge,
It may be ye were born, or there
It may be, I yield nutriment!
It occupied him from a boy,
It wakens in my breast again.
It whiled his idle hours away
It will be by a mob beset
Its driver seated on the rim
Its ebullition foaming white
Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,
Learn to possess more self-control.
Its name, my friends, was Martin Zadeka,
Jilted--glad of a holiday.
Judge then what roses would be ours,
Just at a moment which I grieve
Just manages a feeble trot
Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,
Just so! that modest swain is blest
Keep your accounts! You'd rather not?
Laid down his life of sun and storm
Latest arrivals' salutations,
Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,
Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,
Leisurely through the gateway glides.
Just at the hour we designate
Just placed the entrance door ajar.
Knew not an iamb from a choree,
Latin is just now not in vogue,
Lenski the foeman's apparition
Known unto children perfectly:
_Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
Lament, embrace upon that grave.
Lay languishing both day and night--
Lead into good society,
Lenski his comrade did invite.
Just as he entered. How severe!
Istomina the nimbly-bounding;
Its stamping, capers and high leaps.
Journeys and warriors to wed.
Just before dinner-time he slept,
Lenski replied, and soon they be
Jaws are at work. On every side
Jealousy and vexation took
Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,
Lenski at intervals would dare,
Killed! at this dreadful exclamation
Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.
Know that thy face that day I see.
Landscapes thereon he would design,
Late in the afternoon to rise,
Like Venus when, capriciously,
Ladies in crowds around her close,
Leaning against the dam expects,
Lenski as a good match received,--
Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
Lenski his pencil-case took out
Lenski the stroke could not sustain,
Lest the world or her lord divine
Lenski, into confusion thrown,
Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,
Lessons to give he understood!How soon he learnt to titillate
Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought
Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
Like Horace, planted cabbages,
Listen to me without disdain.
Like Leonora did she ride
Lenski unto the dame replied,
Lest jaded with satiety,
Lest the malicious reader or
Let me explain that in my song
Let me present ye to the man,
Let not the poet's spirit freeze,
Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
Like a Bacchante in her sport
Like down from Aeolus's lip,
Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;
Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown--
Like you and me and all the rest?--
Lo! my Oneguine rural lord!
Let us go seek a little rest--
Let us proceed unto a rill,
Like D when dinner doth inspire.Destiny hath preserved his lay.
Likewise an epitaph with tears
Like a full moon magnificent.
Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
Like him renouncing vanity,
Lived as a really wise man ought,
Listless is she the livelong day
Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,
Lo! in my garden was she found
Lo! my Oneguine free as air,
Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,
Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
They shovel silver with a spade,
I'm not for witchcraft now inclined.
Impetuously clove its way
In a half-open dressing-gown
In horror for itself alone,
In order due the maidens pull;
Lo! with what pride celestial
It matters not. Hope e'en to these
List! the snow crunches--he draws nigh!
Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
Long in this fashionable cell
Life lies extended, vast and bright,
Lo! through the frozen windows play
Lo, the ambassador who speaks
Long ceased to be a reading man,
Lofty the chambers one and all,
Long time in meditation deep
Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;
Malignant fury they disclose,
Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
Long ago?"--"'Tis the second year."
Long listen, comprehend the whole
Long since I held thee at the font--
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:
Long time her young imagination
Long, long the hour had past when home
Looks upon all with absent gaze
Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
Love to idealize inclined;
May be, and this my terror wakes,
Meals, secrets, occupations shared?
Malicious and a slanderer.
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,
Me your perfections would not bless;
Measured with great exactitude.
Meeting you in times past by chance,
Men love no more, as only the
Method was dear unto his heart
'Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,
Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
Moina recalls for this alone
May find a crumb to satisfy.
May be the empire of the sense,
May well in innocence impart.
May yet be studious of his nails;
Meet punishment for him provide.
Metreless verses recognizing
Morality taught scarce at all;
More troublesome than usual?"--"No!
Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.
Miraculously fair arise,
"Monsieur l'Abbe" a starving Gaul,
Morning awakes with joyous sound;
Moscow approach on bended knees,
Moscow, Russia's darling daughter,
Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
More advantageously appear
Moscow
More swift the room Tattiana fled,
Morning's forerunners, breezes blow
Must take a walk and rest a bit--
Long tortured by his lay divine,
Longer the East inert reclines
Longtime was her heart desolate
Longtime her mind is occupied.
Look through the window and kill flies.
"Look quickly to your left, my sweet!"
Looms gray behind the mist and morn
Lost in the hamlet far away.And in addition youth is flame
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall
Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff
Loud paws the earth each panting horse,
Love to inspire doth woe appear
Love's tender transports and distress,
Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
Maid whom my heart desires alone,
Maidens before her meekly move
Maids in the corner whisper low;
Make up your mind to go there."--"Ah!
Malek Adel and De Linar,
Luceria Lvovna paint applies,
Made me so tipsy long ago!
Man--forty years long in this wise--
Made revelations undesigned,
Matrons unto the fireplace go,
Me now, inflict upon me pain?--
Meantime I'll finish whilst I can
Meagre, within a draughty hut,
Meantime Oneguine's apparition
Meantime in matutinal dress
Many an ancient legend which
Mark ye with what a modest air
Marmontel also, tome the third;
May be that I by heaven's decrees
Mends with the Russian hammer's blows
Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
Men opposite. The cross they sign
Meantime a Cyclops of those parts
Men become friends from idleness.But even thus not now-a-days!
Men will forget me, but my urn
Merciful God, what will he deem?"
Moscow, how oft in evil days,
Minutely I will now portray.
Misunderstanding, words and blows.
Modest yet daring! And a tear
More blooming than the Boreal flame
Mushrooms for winter salted down,
More clearly, God be praised, the man,
More crimson every moment they.
More satisfaction to her taste.
More timid than a doe long chased,
Mortally sick I am indeed.
Moscow! How much is in the phrase
Mournful is thine approach to me,
Moscow's young Graces at her stare,
Most by this circumstance offended
Most carefully Zaretski placed
Mournful Love's deadly trace appears
Most usually a Cossack horse
Mountains we'll level and through deep
Must be pronounced unfortunate--
My frivolous and jolly youth.
Must bow in common courtesy;
Must e'en despise his kind at last;
Mute glances interchanged aside
Mutual repulsion and ennui,
My beauty, thou art ready too.
Must now my stanzas occupy.Tattiana was her appellation.
Must visit them. Come! you must own,
Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
Mutual destruction to contrive.
"My chum lives here," Bruin grunts out.
My country's honour and repute
My country and an exile's lot;
"My darling child, thou art in pain.--
"My darling, growing old am I!
My days of life approach their end,
My doom has been pronounced on high,
My friend, 'tis but to pay a debt,
My famous portrait indicate
My friends, what means this odd digression?
Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
My goddesses, where are your shades?
My gratitude do not disdain,
My guardian angel to the grave.
My heart with but one look revive;
My image hath not disappeared,
My light productions to retain,
My lot is fixed--with thoughtlessness
My memory wandered wide and sought
My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
My mournful fate in verse to weave,
My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
My heart of old would captivate.
My heart's allegiance can resign,
My heroine, Tattiana dear.Vladimir, hourly more a slave
My little book. With thee I knew
My mother-in-law who lately died
My pen no longer finds delight,
My soul I cannot renovate--
"My heart's delight, thou art not well."--
My joy in youth was fleeting e'en
My pretty self-deceiving maid--
Next Saturday. The Larina
My morning birdie, yesternight
My poor Tattiana cannot sleep
."My second!" cried in turn Eugene,
My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,
My poor Vladimir, bitter tears
My tongue is somewhat rusty now.Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
"No matter, look immediately.
My spirit and my blood doth move,
My scholar without aptitude
My soul is filled with gratitude!
My wretched Lenski's fate I mourn,
Nearer they come--Eugene appears!
Nags eighteen to the door are driven.
None the conviction could withstand
Never for me to reappear--
Night separated from her spouse,
No novelty--is it not true?--
None could a trace of that impute,
None could her beautiful declare,
Nor in his dreams anticipates
"Nothing, good nurse, there's nothing wrong,
Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,
Nor precepts sage nor pictures e'en,
Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
Nor the _Journal des Modes_, I vouch,
Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
Not daring to cast back her eyes.
Not even a poetic phrase,
Now don't be cross with me, my soul,
O'er my remains to drop a tear,
Obeyed the impulses of heart?--
Of Africa, ancestral land,
Of London life is "vulgar" called
Of Volga fishermen doth sing,
Of tender years the modesty
Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,
Of thy delights I drank my fill,
"Not in the least, assured am I!"--
Now it is ready to be sent--
O epic Muse, my powers increase
"Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
Of "comme il faut." Shishkoff, forgive!
Of affectation innocent,
Of every sort and every set!"--
Of pictures painful harrowing,
Obsequious or indifferent!
Of life or death predestinate.
Of fashionable dames the foe,
Of late I have been quite absurd,--
Of love again, and yet again;
Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
On horseback gallop o'er the steppe!
On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
Of the commencement of the piece.
Not high in general estimation;
Not knowing its interpretation,
Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.
Of a most mournful episode,
Now talkative, now reticent;
Of languor and of love did tell
O'erwhelmed with guests; by families
Of conversation, thought and aims--
Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.
O Spring, thou chosen time of love!
Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
Of roses to romancers dear;
Oppressor of the wretched poor;
Of such a dread hallucination.
Of the domains of the side-scene.
Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
Of what not, and of distant dim,
Of widow Clicquot or Moet
One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
Oneguine lightning glances shot;
"Oneguine, I was younger then,
Oneguine was a citizen
Oneguine, hast forgotten yet
Or quietly partake our woe.
Pallid and with dishevelled hair,
My spirit with such pangs before.Another time, so willed it Fate,
My splendid house and gaieties--
My sportive Muse I used to take
Napoleon tarried till it please
"My uncle's goodness is extreme,
My unpretending page shall fill,
My venerated reader, oh!
My very latest composition!
My verses, kindly meant, would earn
Ne'er touched her fingers indolent
My word of honour given have I.The tea, as I remarked, appeared,
Ne'er trusted to the treacherous ace.When, wise at length, we seek repose
Nay! even as this instant fled,
Nay, near--but destiny decreed--
Near Khariton's in a side street
Near young Tattiana resident,
"No misery I see in that"--
Nearest and dearest knew not how
Never upon my heroine
No fond illusions live to soothe,
Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,
No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,
No coquetry was there, I vouch--
No longer through her former home;
No greater pleasure can exist
Mysteriously all objects near
My sum of happiness contained;
No more at dawn the shepherd will
No more remembered him; unto
No more the village knows his face,
No obstacle of which I know.
None, be my witness Heaven above!
Nor at the hour of noon with sound
No one appeared to lend a hand.
No one my anguish comprehends,
No other than Oneguine mine.
No time to pick it up! afraid,
No trace ye left in passing by
No, never in the early blaze
Nor did her blushes fade away,
No other book had time to read.
Noblesse and models of the mode,
Nor beauties of far distant lands
Nor discontinued to distress
Nor almanacs nor newspapers,
Nor by her beauty she became
Nor by her sister's brilliancy
Nor dares the skirting of her dress
Nor died nor lost his senses quite.
Nor further comment that night made.
No senseless fashionable lay
No more the music thunders loud,
No more with pale Diana's rays,
No sense was ever manifest
No signs of trouble her accused,
No, ever to behold your face,
Nor aught confides unto the rest.Tattiana would have gladly heard
Nor enough strength of mind possessed
Nor frigid adulation paid.
Nor even tears afford respite,
Nor from the mob polite estranged,
Nor homage which the Muse demands
Nor on the letter yet hath she
Nor marked how summer's prime had fled
Nor shall the bud of yesterday
Nor shall the caterpillar come
Nor true unto her sorrow kept.
Nought of its charms original
Now a long branch itself entwined
Not to behave as he did once--
Now all things round about repeat
Obedient then to Nature's law,
Nor interest in aught betrays.
Nor sudden turned she red or white,
Nor years of separation all
Nor shall my pen paint terribly
Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.
Not agony, but death expressed.
Not all will like myself proceed--
Not the least trace Oneguine sees
Now, like hereditary foes,
November at the gate did stand.The morn arises foggy, cold,
O'erspread with Winter's carpet bright,
Not the young timid maid, believe,
Not, and a flood of bitter tears
O feet, where'er your path extends
Nought in the universe refused:
Now Didelot scarce can be endured!"Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,
O Brenta, once more we shall meet
Now of a family the head,
O my Svetlana.'--Joukovski
O triumphs of my guileless days,
O'er all a sheet of silvery dust
Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
Now for the first time I my Muse
Now her lithe form she arches o'er
Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
Obedient to the magic strings,
Now we must separate. Good-bye!
Now with what eager interest
O Men, how very like ye are
Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
Oblivion of life's tempest dire,
Of Levshin's school ye followers,
Of Olga he in song averred;
Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
Of Russian domesticity;
Of a strange night when the moon and--
Of kindly, dim antiquity,
Of all the guests within his mind.Certainly not Eugene alone
Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
Of his approach; but nothing cared
Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
Of censure for the same incurred;
Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
Of diplomats and warlike beaux
Of consolation all bereft--
Of course Tattiana was annoyed
Of creditors a hungry rout
Of dreary Russia left behind,
Of friends the grateful intercourse--
Of migratory gipsy hordes--
Of fleeting glory take no heed.
Of fiery youth's untutored days
Of many an economic scheme;
Of horn in circle call them round.
Of keen sarcastic intellect
Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,
Of modern Russians the disease.Bouyanoff, wrathful cousin mine,
Of my light paramour was proud.
Of old maids the divinity,
Of one thing till again we met.
Now I am ready to refuse.
(Nonsense and pure absurdity,
Nor boston nor the world's affairs
Nor doth my absent pen portray
Nor long his mind was agitated
Nor slander viciously could spread
Not bristled up like a wild beast,
Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
Obedient to warm Spring's commands.
Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,
Nought but of dinners a long row,
Nought from his pen did ever flow,
Of passion they so often raise.
Now for the jealous youth what joy!
Now, as in a deserted house,
Of a heart cold and cynical?
Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.
Of error and the passions' strife.
Of harmony enshrining thought.
Of thankless friends the circle rose,
On such a day. O Heavens, 'tis she!
Of my impassioned heroine.
Of passion reminiscences,
Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
Of the AEneid, but incorrect.
Of the cup brimming o'er with wine--
Of the Tattiana of times fled.
On thigh or temple, friend on friend.Resolved the flirt to cast away,
Of the imperial Neva's shore.
Of the night sentinels arise
Of the romances she preferred,
Oh, how her lips compressed restrain
One image occupied his mind,
On lines invisible are fixt;
"Oh! how our years are vanishing!"But nothing changed in them is seen,
Of sunset glow with rosy light,
Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
Ombre, and whist all others worth:
Omens inspired her soul with fear,
On unknown female forms he throws.
On sunny days the glistening rime,
Oneguine then approached and said:
Oneguine to the window went
Oneguine was--so many deemed,
Oneguine, by first impulse moved,
Or a swift hare from mead to mead
Or letters of a maiden young.And by degrees upon him grew
Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
'Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
Of touching lightly every theme.
Of untold gain she must conceal,
Of which the rustling woods remind?
Of woods and fields the calm retreat,
Of youthful impulse, reverie,
Oh, many a year hath run its course
Or a swift meteor, may be,
Of woe: effaced the pathway now:
Of your perfections in my soul,
Oh! I accept. And instantly
On balls I madly used to dote,
Oh! what had been his eminence!
Oh! who is not calumnious?
Old age through spectacles too peers,
Olga began to long likewise
On Lenski's matrimonial fate
On winters of the south a skit,
Olga and Tania led. Malign,
On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
Once more, when she appeared in sight,
Oneguine Olga bore away.
Oneguine could not now submit,
Oneguine, O my gentle readers,
Oneguine knew enough, the rogue
Or bosom full of languid fire,--
Openly or 'neath decent cloak.
Or else ,
Our misanthrope was full of ire,
On chairs in the saloon reposed,
On melted wax in water poured;
On the blue blocks of ice the rays
Oneguine wasted; on my word,
Oneguine's cheek grew ashy pale,
"Oneguine, all this sumptuousness,
On the dull stage find all things changed,
Oneguine acted very well
Oneguine ne'er as poet showed
Oneguine, bored to death again,
Oneguine sat the table by
Oneguine--the beloved place
Or "Idol mio," and in the grate
Or by a card our homage pay,
Or he dispersed the motley crowd
Or if he meant to flirt again,
Or kiss the border of her dress.To Olga frequently he would
Or by the ocean's rocky shore.
Or e'en Istomina, my dear,
Or faults of grammar on its page--
Or in a squabble to engage,
Or for the solitary tomb
Or recognized not in the crowd.
Or reconciled them, it may be,
Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.She seemed of him oblivious,
Or the delivery of a note.
Or vainly 'mid luxurious fare
Or will my melancholy glance
Or, after dinner's dull repast,
Or, parable more flattering,
Our fathers used to dote upon;
Or, with a pen and colours fit,
Page after page continued reading,
Our idol, Honour's motive force,
Outside descend the mists of night.
Society endures not such!
Our liberty at least survives:
Pair after pair the race sustain.
Park, garden, palings, yard below
Our paradise is no more sweet.Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,
Our union would produce but grief.
Passes the torrent But alack!
Pallid and melancholy face,
Paris and Menelaus right.
Pardon I ask for such a sin--
Pedantic although scholar like,
Perchance one more affectionate.
Pervaded with much common sense.
Perched on a goose's neck a skull
Permit me; is it worth the trouble
Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,
Pictures of the amusing scene,
Past darkened windows and long streets
Petoushkoff, the provincial swell;
Possession hath no power to please,
Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,
Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,
Portray the solitary den
Presentiments oppressed her heart.
Replace the visions fancy drew;
Presents her quarto amiably,
Proceeds, until she from a hill
She promised Eugene, or she would
Perchance he will to all the three.
Plates, knives and forks are clattering
Prevailed at last. She in reply
Repose from labour, satire keen,
Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,
Satan will jest, and at love's cost.Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
She dreamt she journeyed o'er a field
Russia's Terpsichore review
Seductive, animated, bright,
Seen all, beside himself with wrath,
Simple and kindly and unwed,
Rekindled in my withered heart
Rooted unto the spot remained.As if against obstruction sore
Restrained the impulses of youth;
Said something in an undertone
Sees where a noble mansion stood,
She comprehends. The simple maid
She fears she cannot.--Cannot? Why?--
She consolation thence obtained--
She got a book of nursery tales,
She mourned and to the moon would raise
She trembled and grew deadly pale.
She nerves herself from her alarm
She sits alone--'tis ever _she!_So frequently his mind would stray
She, than the morning moon more pale,
Slow circling round its fellow swings
Profiles of lovely dames he knows
Prophecies, threats and apparitions,
Quarrels among young friends he bred
Proud of his dinners and his wife!
Raged round him and of balked desire!
Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
Reader, whoever thou mayst be,
(Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
Rebuffed--as quickly reassured,
Received him freely at her house,
Reform me both in deed and word,
_Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie_.
Regained authority awhile,
Remained unnoticed. Once he went
Remained with him the youthful maid.
Renowned for his acumen, wit,
Shall I your chorus hear anew,
Reviews both dress and countenance,
Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
Rings from a dish of water full
Seated, a curious look with glasses
Secret excursions made in sleighs;
Sailed silently in unison--
Rogue and extortioner of yore,
_Sed alia tempora_. And bravery
Saint Priest, who every album's page
Scarce credits what his eyes can see.Hark! the mazurka. In times past,
Seductive cup of love, whose flow
Shaking with serious air the head,
Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
Scarcely in Russia can ye find
She cannot draw a breath or stir.
"Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?
She deemed its outline might afford.
She runs, the bear upon her trail,
She gazed around her--it was day.
She gazed thereon, and instant beat
She hears the bear behind her press,
She is an angel! We sometime
She rose--departed. But Eugene
Shone pungent Satire's dauntless king,
She starts, nor doth a word express,
Should be respected throughout life
Should dearly like a dance again.
Should make me much more circumspect,
Singing God knows what maid admired,
Shouts of applause! Oneguine passes
Shouts, laughter, jamming 'gainst the wall,
Sickness more courage doth command
Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
Since I beheld Eugene and young
Since in these arms I thee did bear--
Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
Singing inside her hut the maid
Sledging, the snows, which at the time
Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
Phials of crystal scents enclose.
Philosopher just turned eighteen.China and bronze the tables weight,
_Qu'ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
Rural LifeCanto The FourthThe less we love a lady fair
Round which revolves the universe.
Scarce to her questions he responds,
Rousseau, I would remark in passing,
Sincerely loving him, Eugene
Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
Scissors both straight and curved as well,
Serious endeavours to assure
She peeped through a chink of the door.
Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
She cannot--Eugene oped the door
She calm and unconcerned appears.The husband comes and interferes
She cannot--then impatiently
She strains her throat to force a cry--
She will not see, she will not hear.
Should recompense his idle jeers,
So inaccessible to men,
Silent, oracular ye'd see him
So, when he came next day to call,
Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
Sits by her gloomily, desponds,
Slowly exhausted by desire,
So ardently did I desire
Snorts, and his rider bends his course
So let us to the ball-room haste,
So full of piety, correct,
So hearken, every worthy spouse,
Society renounced once more.
So prudent, and so circumspect
So she her silken sash unlaced,
So there will be a dance to-night.
Spanned the unbridled torrent o'er;
So be it! But internal strife
Sombre or glad in turn to be,
Some Russian authors he perused--
Some a mazurka occupies,
Some are afar and some are dead.
Some army poet therein may
Some madrigal not worth a rush,
Some marriageable maids behold,
Some nice instructive novel read,
Some wretched journal in his hand;
Sometimes by pleasing flattery's art,
Sometimes by ready-made despair;
Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
Sometime collected, shall relate
Some day I'll somehow finish it.
Soon the maid on a chair he seats,
Spare yourself unavailing pain
Stately, devoid of prejudice,
Tattiana courage doth regain
Subscribed, _toujours a vous, Annette;_
Such were the musings of Eugene.
Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
Spared him not their asperities.
Spring cheered him up, and he resigned
Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
Stiff, overstarched and insolent,
Still everywhere, without, within,
Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.
Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
Stood as if struck by lightning fire.
Straight for the entrance then he made
Tattiana motionless abides.The strife grew furious and Eugene
Struck Lenski dead--across the scene
Tattiana faltered, and became
Tattiana finds in loneliness.
Swearing how Lenski he would rile,
Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
Submissive as if in a swoon,
Such was Oneguine's sainted life,
Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
Such am I. This did ye expect,
Such open-hearted innocence.
Suddenly to the left hand side,
Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
Swift following in her wake, the sun,"
Take to their wings and fly away.But to Oneguine! _A propos!_
Tall, slender, like thy form designed,
Tania the meaning would obtain
Tania well nigh expired when he
Tattiana
Tattiana certainly infers
Tattiana doth accept his aid;
Tattiana every day conferred
Tattiana gazed with curious eye
Tattiana in a misty dream,
Tattiana in traditions old
Tattiana purchased with a stray
Tattiana in despair unfeigned
Tattiana in the yard appears
Tattiana in the young princess!
Tattiana loved as when a lad,
Tattiana o'er the stream complained;
Tattiana more than ever burned
Tattiana terrified awoke.
The family of Kharlikoff,
Tattiana thanks to all returned,
Tattiana to a corner, bids
Tattiana to the index flies
Tattiana would attempt to fly,
Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
That I to you reveal my mind?
Tattiana--thus the sex is born.--
Tend not my heart to mitigate,
Than cold Oneguine's oddities,
Than health, so with a trembling hand
That all may hear his voice's tone.Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
That every morn at Verrey's cost
That he was "ready any day."
Tattiana's trouble might have spied,
Tattiana, Russian to the core,
That is, he could elucidate
That vicious set whom I don't blame--
That afterwards with evil smile
That guests approach: and when above
That until Christmas comes again
The bard his answer waits at home,
That year the autumn season late
The Fete
The amatory science warm,
The aspect of a landscape drear.
That, tipsy once in actual fight,
The "in memoriam" pages sought,
The Princess N. will be at home
Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?"--
That I am rich, a prince's wife?--
That youthful heart--"But, now at least,
The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,
The bard's enthusiastic strain,
The door flew open--Olga came,
That for that matter in my verse
The credulous indeed are blest,
The disenchanted glass direct
The easier 'tis to gain her grace,
That my dishonour would ensure
The company deep silence guard.
The crafty spouse caressed him, who
The chief of the Chaldean wise,
The curse of commonplace delight.
The curtain now they slowly raise.
The dream left terror in its train.
"The family are all quite well--
The goblet still is bubbling bright--
The fashionable rhymester's heart!
The father scarcely understands
The feeble moment would espy
The forests in mysterious gloom
The fire of the nocturnal lights;
The foaming Lenski would refuse,
The gilding of life's vanities,
The heart of the inveterate flirt!
The lamps illuminating shine;
The German baker looks around
The Larinas were since sunrise
The ball in all its splendour shone.I tried when I began this tale,,
The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,
The boy was wild but full of grace.
The contact of the foot I raised
The Larinas would celebrate,
The Lovelaces are out of date,
The Paris of those country parts
The Russian winter did adore
The artifice of villany--
The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!
The country hath its liberties
The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
The captain of a company.
The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
The clue unto some mystery
The conversation was revived
The crowd and merriment and light,
The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
The doors swing open: Lenski makes
The die is cast! Thine is my life!
The drama of my youth was played.
The dusty chronicles of earth
The fair, nor parted with regret,
The epistle from the bard presents.
The fever of the blood to slake--
The first appearance of the snows
The fisher's fire afar illumes
The first bright wreathing storm of snow
The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
The goddess would a masquerade
The guests make room; aside each takes
The ladies, their fantastic dress,
The friend of liberty and laws
The friends are called and quickly placed.Right opposite Tattiana placed,
The golden ember now enshrines,
The hero we immortalize.
The hour when--Fate so willed--we met
The indignation of her heart!
The ladies' laughter to provoke.
The drum already doth arouse.
The crystals of her vestibule
The feet of my dear lady friends.
The feet of graceful ladies fly,
The fires of passion and its smart--
The first-fruits of my tale I read,
The giddy world at last shall see.
The hero is of my narration!
The imagination to enliven
The military band will play.
The insensate fire of love still glowed
The language of her girlish pleading
The languid eye of love-sick maids,
The last poor obol I was worth--
The lively trash of stories long
The maids beside Tattiana keep--
The man and liked his company,
The maiden's weary eye which yearned,
The manners of the highest class
The matter by his conscience tried,
The medium is required of gold.
The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
Some one or other editor
"Oh! nurse, nurse, you don't understand!
"Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
"Oh! whither have ye winged your way,
Olga he sees before his eyes
Olga ran skipping from the door.
On waves by tempests curdled o'er!
Olga's admirer came that day:
On fresh allurements they are bent,
On us beyond the grave attends,
On whom a sister's heart was set
Oneguine's letter!"--"Ah! the thing!
Olga with trepidation dire.
On raptures, sorrows not her own,
Oneguine went with trepidation
Open the window--sit by me."
On him spleen mounted sentinel
On horseback every day they ride--
On innocent delights I dote,
One instrument for his own use--
Oneguine slowly then began
Oneguine waits on us, 'tis like."
Oneguine's speeches I abhorred
Only her countenance assumed
Opened with care, and entering bore
Oneguine fired--Alas! alas!
Oneguine his excuses says;
Oneguine oped the cupboards wide.
Oneguine meditative stood,
Or couplets more ingenious still;
Or but for fame he saw the light;
Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
Or counting on his uncle's death
Or a good fellow for the nonce,
Or any trifle else ye like
Or did her tears soon cease to flow?
Or even overcome by wrath
Or e'en the "Demon" of my strain.
Or monster of Satanic pride,
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Or other mask donned playfully?
Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,
Or torturer malevolent?
Or, as it were, the Freischutz' score
Or, heedless of the leaves' return
Or, it may be, we inly seek,
Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
Or Bogdanovitch's sweet lays.
Or better,--like a faithful wife.I was for calm existence made,
Or even, silent and resigned,
Or ice and flame, are not diverse
Or into bold hands anxiously
Or suffering pride? Why is he there?
Original imagination,
Our tender dreamer had enrolled
Or, strange to me is happiness?
Or, when anew all Nature teems,
Our dear old aunt, Princess Helene,
Perchance upon the Neva e'en
Other and colder thoughts affright,
Ourselves as unities to count;
Passed into dull eternity,
Outlandish and provincial,
Passion's wild sway I then allowed,
Pelagie Nikolavna has
Pen, paper bring: the table too
Perceived that he was still beloved,
Perchance they laurels also cull--
Perchance you also soon may burn,
Philanthropist or patriot,
Pour on this orb a dazzling light
Perish when half disclosed its bloom!"--
Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
Possess my love and sympathy.
Perverse, unfavourable views?
Placed at the customary range;
Poetic transport. They impart
Please her by their decorum fixed,
Poetical enthusiast,
Pray is it he? It is the same.
Priams of country populations
Professions eagerly for deeds,
Or at a promenade mayhap,
Oneguine--take him up again--
Or a professor in tulle cap.
Or innocently past me fly.
Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
Or to disturb my dreams approach
Our godlike tongue she could exchange
Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
Raises within my breast as oft
Providence otherwise may deem--
Pursues phantasmagoria vain.Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?--
Spoiled children most degenerate
Pursuits I followed of the crowd,
Questions and news and tittle-tattle,
Scornfully challenged you afield--
Quick to the country let us wend
Resounding through all ages might
Shall surely, be it soon or late,
Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
She did not think "procrastination
She led me through nocturnal mist
She visited the humble tents
Silk tapestry upon the wall,
Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
Silvers the brook; the shepherd's horn
Sits down and gazes on all sides--
So she in French herself expressed.
Sorrow to counterfeit and wail--
Sterner solicitudes engage,
Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick--
Tattiana gazes on the moon,
That chosen heroes consecrate,
Reduced with effort unto sense,
Relate some ancient history."
Remains on earth the unseemly rage,
Repentance wields not now her spell
Repose in peace, thou child of song_."
Sang childhood's pastimes and its joy,
Returning, from his ship amid
She muses: "What was Olga's fate?
Replaced them in their box, undressed
Reserved, but not inanimate,
Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
Similar dames ye may have seen.
Seeing in this no deprivation,
She leisurely away doth ride,
She brought with her the gift of song.
She never of deception dreamed
Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,
That first the Muse appeared to me.
Slumber still o'er him lingering flies.
So be it! Just the laws which bid
So irremissible appear?O ye whom tender love hath pained
So many neighbours here exist--
Still for ever fare thee well.'--Byron
Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
Striking the intellect with awe
"Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?"
So uncongenial to my mind,
Spite of herself with Lenski's lot
Subdued him, when his neighbour stept
Sweeter it is, my friends, if he
Tattiana waits. No answer came!
Tattiana's beauty, pale with care,
Terror of guardians of the night;
That I forget not whom I sing.
Stops at the tomb in passing by;
Sweet to behold him obstinate,
Tattiana's love was quite sincere,
Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
Tell me, of sentiments concealed
Tender and elevated, free?
That Heaven her character had blent
That a friend's arm in every case
The simple epitaph--a tear
Retained the image, though short-lived,
Sails her allotted course on high,
Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
She never more his face may view,
Secure in rural quietude--
Seek the forgotten countenance
Seems so unnatural and absurd:
Selfish nonentities around?
She from the winter corn espies
She seeks the garden in her need--
Seeks, winding amid meadows still,
She hears of conversation nought
She oped her eyes and cried: 'tis he!
She drinks in those seductive deeds!
Seemed in a haze of green embowered.
She fears and like an arrow rushes
She the delicious novel reads,
She waited for--I don't know whom!
She was as heedless and as gay--
Simeon Petrovitch just as shabby;
She wanders aimless as a sprite,
Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
Shines in the female firmament
Since leisure was together spent,
So ancient warriors, battles o'er,
Serve who could neither read nor write.Time was, in style magniloquent
Shall abdicate the bard's profession,
Shall my declining years beguile;
"Shall we commence?"--"Let it be so,"
She bows her head beneath the crown;
She murmurs in an undertone
She buries deep within her breast
She heard of servant-maids the note,
She heaves a sigh and deep intent
She on the apparition gazed,
She waits, on fire her trembling frame--
Singing in chorus all the while.
(So 'twas with us in former years,
So from the mountain lazily
So meantime let him joyous live
So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit--
Society he duped enow."
Some other long-departed Spring,
That our desires which noblest seemed,
Speech was so tame and colourless
Spring's paramour, pours forth her song
Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;
Spring summons you to her green bowers,
Still doth the misanthrope appear?
Still eats and drinks enough for twain.Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.
Still happier he who ne'er hath known!
Still of his club he member was--
Straight from their province had he come?"--
Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o'er.I write to you! Is more required?
Successfully to please her tried,
Such is the country custom good;
Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
Suitable for this semi-Russian.
Tania doth by the casement linger
Tania, observed by nobody,
Tattiana by a poor aunt's side,
Tattiana gently led them there.And long her eyes as through a haze
Tattiana suffered secretly;
Tattiana through the forest erred,
Tattiana with impatience waited
Tattiana's letter I possess,
Terpsichore alone among
Than one's own fascinating self.Here I remark all poets are
That girl whom once on a time he
That glimmered through the radiant night
That Nina's marble symmetry,
That crass stupidity misleads,
That girl--but he must dreaming be--
That, for the century designed,
That heart with inspiration sweet
That mind which yearns for space is bound?
That hero, though his merit shone,
That mediocrity alone
That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.
That we by cant ourselves deceive,
That soon I reach my thirtieth year?And so my noon hath come! If so,
That the two friends with morning's light
That we her constantly betrayed
That vanished are my youthful days,
The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
The God of Love is after you!A coquette loves by calculation,
The Muse abandoned, ta'en a wife,
The Great World
The Lord deliver her and save!
The Muse revealed her first delight,
The Muse capricious let us coax,
The Neva's Cleopatra, and
"The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!"--
The PoetCanto The SecondThe village wherein yawned Eugene
The accents wild of other's woes,
The aged nurse in ample gown,
The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
The bee forth from his cell of wax
The body they consigned to rest,
The Russian language I deem vile
The aged mother, bathed in tears,
The aged woman in her woe:
The altar flame was quenched in night.Tranquil he lay, and strange to view
The blessings of humanity.Or, it may be, the bard had passed
The blood boiled and the passions strove.
The artful prisoner should seek
The blood gushed from the wound and steamed
The breath of Spring again renewed,
The bridge and alley to the lake,
The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,
The all-entrancing joys of love--
The avalanche of snow first bends,
The captives of the Salguir's shore.
The chaise long ordered please employ,
The cold reply with gloomy mien
The child of sloth and liberty.
The china teapot too ye might
The cold sweat bursting from his brow,
The coming of life's Autumn drear.
The comrade of your youth should strike,
The connoisseur his glances throws
The foes with downcast eyes abide.Foes! Is it long since friendship rent
The conversation tedious
The converse of our hermits twain,
The converse of the world polite,
The crash of music, candles' glare
The days of love and of romance!
The days which to your youth belong?
The fair of the next generation,
The eyes of a grave general.
The fire extinguished in his breast,
The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
The glass unwittingly inspect
The lancer, to his calling bound,
The cool dark oaken grove to range,
The crowd doth head and shoulders rise
"_The date, his fleeting years how long--
The fatal hour had come at last--
The fated nutriment desired;
The fruits of learning and combined
The gossip of their ladies fair.Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
The happiest days of life employ?Love, flowers, the country, idleness
The inscription o'er the gates of Hell
The image of her seal impressed.
The inmate is for ever dumb,
The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,
The kennel or a kindred line,
The ladies' dresses airy, light,
The lady in the crimson cap
"The left? Why, what on earth is there?"--
The little solitary nook
The maid whose note he still possessed
The hamlet, the poor villagers,
The heavens shone in deeper blue,
The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,
The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
The malady of hopeless love
The firmament in mellow light,
The early days of life we sought.
The excited hero in a trice
The evanescent fashions fly
The fatal bullet penetrate,
The fatal secrets of the grave,
The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,
The fervid poet would recite,
The lady's glance upon him fell--
The languid mind could smile at nought,
The fruits of science, evil, good,
The laws of generations past,
The lonely mansion-house to screen
The manly toga scarce assumed,
The prejudices all men have,
The fatal tubes Lepage contrived
The foes, as yet not taking aim,
The frolics of maidens.They sang, whilst negligently seated,
The general who accompanies.
The hero's name too in advance,
The freshness of her heart impair,
The gifted songster never swerved,
The hostess doth interrogate:
The idols of their adoration
The letter which Tattiana wrote.
The letter is the thing, you see,--
The lily's stem to eat away,
The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
The matter did not agitate,
The memory of the bard, a dream,
The nightingale there all night long,
The path which leads to glory's goal.
The style of wise antiquity.
The memory of the bard was driven
The moderns of the ancients rave--
The men salute with lower bows
The misanthrope of gloomy brow,
The miserable bard to meet,
The moment for revenge, meanwhile,
The monsters of the British Muse
The moon in the blue atmosphere.
The most industrious man alive
The mystic lines to tear away
The motley moving mass and bright,
The servants used to congregate
The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
The mystic monogram, O. E.
The native Russian tongue impeach?
The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.Already crisp hoar frosts impose
The neighbours come, in sledge approach,
The new moon's crescent slim she spied,
The olden time shall be my theme.Old people's simple conversations
The passionate speeches I'll repeat,
The pervert world with icy chill
The peace which on his forehead beamed,
The poet's fervid conversation
The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
The snow upon the streets doth melt--
The nightingale trills forth her tune;
The nights of golden Italy
_The peasants there are rich as kings,
The old Derjavine noticed me,
The peasant blessed his happy fate.
The perfidies I recollect
The poet fell; already men
The poet's hour hath sounded--See!
The poor girl fell into a faint,
"The post hath kept him, it is like."
The powder in the pan is laid,
The prince's eye Oneguine seeks:
The purest of the dreams we dreamed,
The reaping girls approach and ply
The same unmoved oblivion
The rigour of cold pride and all
The riot of the world and glare
The sad moon only could remark.
The secrets of maidens.
The river through the linden wood.
The pains of night have wholly fled,
The pall of night was growing thin,
The path of hope and tender fear--
The poet from Tamboff secured,
The secrets of the marriage state
The poet, modest though so grand,
The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,
The same warm vision constantly;
The seemly crowd, partaking nought
The sharp flint, screwed securely on,
The shining orbs of night appear;
The shining river clothed in ice;
The silent fields no peasant nears,
The sleep-compelling Grandison,
The sneers of critics superfine;
The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
The natural fickleness of passion,
The old man who has had his freaks,
The poet's madness? for 'tis hard
The opportunity is flown.
The parquet cracked beneath the heel,
The proud ones are not worth the fire
The serpent to unlawful trees
The shutters open; to the skies
The shopman and the pedlar rise
The steed benumbed still pawing stands
The remnant destiny concedes,
The river's bank. Tattiana lone
The snows from off the hills around
The solstice of our earthly years,
The stomach doth admonish us.
The sorrows of a single state.
The speech of man and tramp of horse.
The style in which my hero dressed;
The sum of my existence gone
The tightened leathern rein she draws,
The thirst for fame and man's applause,
The torrent of opinion,
The voice of jealousy is drowned.In my young days of wild delight
The thunderbolt on you descend!
The time when Melancholy's claw
The tiresome man, her value knowing,
The votary of vain delight
The steward sent a note to tell
The story of thy life and fate.
The storm was hushed. The blossom fair
The story of his young love's dream,
The sudden rattling of a car.
The tiny sun shone less on high
The sun had mounted high his steep,
The third at night. Tattiana wakes
The thirst of knowledge and of fame,
The swain of Julia Wolmar,
The time between the wolf and dogs--
The triumph of a conquest new.
The time for mystic strolls which late
The trees in silvery array,
The twenty-sixth year of his age,
The two friends' compliments she hears
The troop of apparitions fled,
The torment born of crime unseen,
The traveller, bird of passage he,
The unbidden guests he roughly chides--
The uncontaminated kiss
The untutored spirit's pangs calmed down
The very morning of our days.He who hath lived and living, thinks,
The valleys dried and gaily flowered;
The vestibule finds empty quite--
The vile seducer shall not dare
The voice of lovers, foes and friends,
Of priceless value all things seem
Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
Nor the frost particles inhale
Nor the first snow of winter seize
Not only sorrow--Ah! my dear,
Not a bad fellow was her father
"Not at all."--"That I can't conceive!
Now I am fit for nothing here.
Not so! My Moscow never went
Not that she had his works perused,
O yes! my hopes soon disappeared."
Of foreign whims the impersonation--
Of her provincial innocence
Of frivolous existence, friends;
Of what he thought and what believed,
"Oh! I remember, where is he?"--
On everything around her gaze,
On Sundays by yon window he,
"Olinka is her junior, see.
Oneguine was the most impressed,
Oppressive now is happiness,
Oneguine's pencillings. His mind
Or parody of modern ways?Hath she found out the riddle yet?
Our heroes at full gallop sped,
Our youthful wanderer should roam.
Perish absorbed by Lethe's stream.
Petoushkoff met the selfsame doom.
Present me."--"You are joking."--"No."--
Please follow this way, lady mine,
Portrayed contemporary man
Pray is it not a tough affair
Preserves and an eternal prattle
Remarkable. She then indeed
Rescue me from oblivion.Perchance some heart 'twill agitate,
Romances three, in which ye scan
Romance of love I pray refer,
See, I can hardly crawl about--
She enters a deserted yard--
She found herself alone at last,
Slept o'er the river misty grown.
Still certain authors, I may add,
Spectacles upon nose, all day
"Tania, my eldest child, you know"--
She hid the trouble of her breast,
Should go, the market for a maid,
Shy, silent did the maid appear
"Sit down. How funny, to be sure!
Some future ignoramus shall
Stood as estranged from all aloof,
Tattiana from the hill descends
Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
That certain volumes she might read.Adieu she to the matron said
That like a friendly voice its tone
The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
The hussar Pykhtin was accused.
Tattiana saw with trepidation
Tattiana as enchanted stood;
Tattiana learns the intelligence--
The counsel good and full of reason,
That bilberry wine, I'm sore afraid,
The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
The cynosure of every eye.
The drive becomes monotonous--
The Country DamselCanto The Third"Whither away? Deuce take the bard!"--
The bays of age and helplessness.
The room my former master used.
The sharp incisions of his nail,
There, in that knot of company,
O'er hillock and o'er meadow throws.
Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
Oft staring through the window pane
On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
On guests their servants used to wait
Surveying them, she thus doth say:
Opened the portals of the tomb
"Poor Yorick," mournfully he said,
She the acquaintances she loves,
Servant of God and brigadier,
The Medal Otchakoff conferred!
The calm existence which I prize
The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,
The epitaph on marble shows:
The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
The twilight pale which softens all,
The moon, the stars, and shining night--
The wind rose instantly, blew out
The words _bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,
The unaffected traits she now
The windows whitened, shutters close--
The wolf upon the highways bold
The woods, still naked to the view,
The venerable dame opined
The witching light of sympathy;
The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
The world enough. Congratulate
Then handed her the song with grace.Congratulations, toasts resound,
Of churches, gardens, belfries high
Of friends unceremonious would
Of serfs the farewell wail have given.
Of the horizon she is like!"--
Opens unto her visitor.
Old women at the coachmen swear.
On iron bridges we shall gaze
On thee I used to meditate!
One moment's slumber suffer not.
Petrovski Palace! Gloomily
Of rural life the sluggish stream;
Or that adoring Grandison
Of whirligigs were very fond,
Our bridges long neglected rot,
Our roads transformed the eye will strike;
Past palaces and nunneries,
Quite a sensation; the position
Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,
Poetic transport did infuse,
Petrovski Palace; come, astir!
Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,
Polite demeanour to preserve,
Recent instructions of its mother.But Tania ne'er displayed a passion
Olga the tea must supervise--
Repose her silken curtains fled,
She could not sleep in her new bed.
Strictly the Carnival observed,
The coach before a house stood still.
The landscape which the moonbeams fret,
The channel of the river stilled
The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice
The deuce with my inside has played."
The young Simeonova too there
The youthful lover once again
The young proprietor we find;
Thee but a little space bewept,
Their voices nought to her impart
Removed her to his country seat,
Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,
Shall I behold thee once again?"--
She soon forgot, began to call
"Say, of the two which was Tattiana?"
She ne'er repeated unto hers.
Seven days and nights the travellers plod.
She gazed--a cue, forgotten long,
She struggled hard at first thus pent,
Strange unto her each childish game,
That grandmothers and grandsires may
"She who with melancholy face
She wore her corset tightly bound,
Sighs on another than her lord
So Tania to her heart's content
Tattiana asks, and hurriedly
Streams excavate subaqueous ways,
Tattiana tears cannot restrain.The limits of enlightenment
She would pronounce _a la Francaise_;
Terrible tales she loved to hear.
The Larinas unwisely went,
That rascal Lovelace she abused;
The Russian N with nasal sound
"The younger, you're in love with her!"
The bath on Saturdays attended,
The early tinkling of the bells
The household property contain:
There came a sudden flash of light,
The beldam saith: "The hearth, by it
The coach is borne o'er ruts and holes,
The bridegroom sage without delay
The curs away to kennel chase,
Their Jealousy and separation
There an imperious skeleton;
The damsel under escort place."Can I inspect the mansion, please?"
Their insolence and waistcoats white
Then my companions young with pleasure
Then suddenly discharge a joke
There is no path; the storm hath strewn
Then in the silent cabinet
Then ye were barely generous,
There the tired ploughman loves to lie,
The family of children hie.
The flimsy wares of Western marts,
The height of fashion, fitting tight,
The horizon luminous doth grow,
The household troop of little boys,
The master always used to sit."Departed Lenski here to dine
The pile of books, with carpet spread
Their branches by the snow bowed down.
Their natural attractions lend
Then glittering in the sun descends.
The journey in a sledge doth please,
The maiden at her casement sits
Their harmless conversation blends
The table with its lamp unlit,
Their heroes used to represent
Their idols they were wont to invest
Their own productions, some insist
Their offspring's innocent flirtations
Their slander e'en was weariness;
"Then amongst strangers I was left--
Then dressed himself...
Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
Then it may be, O flattering tale,
There our Katenine did revive
The girl in marriage they unite.
The house and garden I would see."
Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
Then, then--well, in some solitude
Then to some gallant in your turn
There friends of pure delight had been
Then they came easily enow,
Then to reward such confidence
Then touching Olga they depart
Then, the far capital forgot,
"Then, in the country, is't not true?
There Didelot became glorious,
There is no wreath upon the bough:
There jars of cider block the way,
There is a spot the village near
There long time sad at heart he stayed:
There the confusion, pressure, heat,
There! take it quickly, if ye must).
There'll be a fight. I do not lie.
Thereon the passing traveller read:
There, aping Gulnare's bard, he spanned
There, there, beneath the side-scene's shade
The tale of these romantic men;
The needle nor, o'er framework bent,
The ruts of his own fatherland.Yet on a frosty winter day
The weary way still incomplete,
The starry beacons fade away,
The strange apartment her oppressed:
The verst posts catch the vacant eye
The wedding-day had been arranged,
The wit of others to acquire.
The words and looks of charmers sweet
Thee only would I choose, in truth,
The workpeople she superintended,
Then became busy with the house,
Then he'd malign them secretly
Then the old dames in chorus sing,
They blossom, ripen and they fall
The works of Mr. Richardson.She was thus fond of Richardson
The world is ever altering!
The youthful poet's fond confession.
Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
"Then come with me." The prince proceeds,
Then would we muse as in a trance,
Their claims and explanations shout.
Their coming which no man expects,
Their looks alone produce the spleen.
Then they're so innocent of vice,
Then, I say truly, none but thee
Their giddy sports she ne'er enjoyed.She loved upon the balcony
Their glory with their heels of red
Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:
Then, her distraction to allay,
There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,
They are all natural and low,
These are your relatives, believe:
These evenings as in days of old
These take their seats; the coach of state
They crack a feeble joke and smile--
Their memory lingers still and seems
"Then send your grandson quietly
Their privileged allurements fire
There is no fishmarket retort
There is no stupid calumny
There was no angling for success.
These to the coach of state are bound,
They deem her somewhat finical,
They first of all my brow did wreathe
They growl a bit--they scandalise--
They disappeared by stealth and guile,
They hand in hand to table go.
They have invited you this week.""Me?"--"Yes! It is Tattiana's fete
They wish that ladies should, I hear,
They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,
They long at home have her expected--
They long ago had held debate.
They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
They shout and no one lists at all.
They were the wonderful traditions
They may forget that we exist.
They sent their compliments--but oh!
They sat, but conversation's flow
They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.
They stir the heart as heretofore.
They will receive us with delight."
They would not solemnly debate
"What! Grandison?"--"Yes, certainly!"
The princess from the sofa cried
The two old ladies then embraced
Then be it so! My destiny
Then weeping she sank back distressed
These friends cold-bloodedly draw near
This anchorite amid his waste
This evanescent boyish bliss.
They made him feel inclined to doze;
Thinking to float upon the stream,
Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
Thine honour is my countersign!Tattiana moans and now she sighs
Thinking: 'tis foolish to disturb
(This by command; for it was found,
This gentle daring who could guess?
Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
This glitter, riot, emptiness,
This great discovery relief
This separated us as well--
This, this were true felicity!
This wicked, that absurd he deems,
This lot in life with stern decree?"Ideas and time ne'er backward move;
Though beauty he no more adored,
Thither in future to proceed
This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
Though dazzling its effulgence white,
Though he advanced unceasingly.
Though he surveyed her at his ease,
Though hitherto a lady ne'er
Though now my love might be intense,
Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
Though of romance therein I fail
Though some men, evilly disposed,
Though superannuated rather;
Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
Though, God be praised! he ne'er designed
Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.
Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
Thus a guest with composure will
Thus in the earth the seed expands
Thy dove, thy darling little pet
Till proper rings could be procured.
Tiresome unto her hath become
To God eternal hymns of praise.
'Tis in your power now, if desired,
Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.In cruel solitude each day
Those whom we ought to love, caress,
Thou also, my ideal true,
Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!
Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
Thou too farewell, my liberty!
Through dense aristocratic rows
Though correspondence as a rule
Three pairs of handsome female feet;
Though without palaces and streets,
Three tears they dropt with humble mein
Thrice happy who their agonies
Thus age approached, the common doom,
To the youth Eugene hurried now--
Thy meditative incantation--
Time was, a valiant general might
Time was, the poet's tender quill
Time was, two maidens from their home
To find in gossip such delight,
To crush me with a just disdain.
To raise his pistol to his eye,
To whom amongst the jealous throng
To say farewell, and fussed and fumed
To whom we used to consecrate
We hear with interest intense
Though I confess I hardly dare
Thus carelessly I once portrayed
Though around honoured Priam's throne
(Though certainly mankind he knew
Thus having braved Apollo's rage
Though deep he sinks into the drift;
Thus oft--this I myself confess--
To whom your hearts were consecrate,--
Though by an error and unsought--
Time was, the breath of early dawn
Though scarcely following what was said,
Though to the Academy I come
Three mortal hours per diem he
Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
Took aim--but as immediately
Unfavourable unto her.
To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
'Twas built, the venerable pile,
Two hearts perchance were desolate
'Twas plain--an oaken floor ye scan,
'Twas then he loved the tangled grove
Unseen in thick and tangled grass
Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
Unknown as yet the aching heart,
Unto the sounding sea to list,
Vice had due punishment awarded,
Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
Upon a soul inert and cloyed?--
Upon those pages she descries
Vanished his youthful years at last,
Variety of speech and vests,
To her an elegy composed.
Time without me will lessons give,
'Tis now the season! Idlers all,
'Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;
To ask her name the trouble took.
To many a noisy feast and fight,
To see you by our fireside stand,
To the impressions of our youth,
To-morrow Tania we will show,
Vice in romance is glorified
Was withered ere the morning light--
To write in cantos twenty-five.I've thought well o'er the general plan,
Two pines have joined their tangled roots,
Villages in the distance show
Virtue was with a bride rewarded.But now our minds are mystified
"_Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,
We are the first who such a name
Vociferously paid her court,
Wafted upon poetic wing,
Was a delightful little spot,
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was the sad poet filled with gloom,
Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
We Russians, friends from distant parts
We must admit but little taste
Were to analysis subjected.
To strike imagination serve.
This he believed: a kindred spirit
This life in masquerade concealed,
This is my master's sitting-room.
Thither hussars on leave will stray
This monument of thought profound
This was his social character.
This world. I do not praise desire,
Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
Thou hast resigned thy destiny
Though I'll return to him right early,
Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
Thou'lt quaff love's sweet envenomed stream,
Thou'lt suffer, dearest, but before,
Though Baratynski verses penned,
Though we will not acknowledge it.
Time will the ravages efface--
To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
Though for his Helen Menelaus
'Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_"
To be a charming mystery:
Though late, have a beginning made.
Though the foul vision promise made
Titles and ages intermixed.
'Tis noisome to her there: in thought
'Tis silent--on her shines the moon--
'Tis there that arrant fops display
To classicism I've homage paid,
"What ails thee, dear?"--"I feel depressed.
To clank the spur, delight the fair--
To dire contentment shall give birth
To foreign lands he would allude,
To russify the foreign phrase
Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
Upon my visions such intrude.Fresh aspirations I have known,
Upon the Don's broad pastures bred
Upon the meadows showering,
Waiting his coming--his alone!
To our Tattiana conquering,
To such--delightful to repel.
'Twas then in valleys lone, remote,
Vows matrimonial to break,
Two dressed in uniform appear--
Virgins miraculous I see,
Unknown to all he doth appear,
Upon her elbow she reclines,
Vladimir Lenski was his name,
Wallow, my friends, in company!
Was certainly not erudite
Was younger than myself, my light,
"We never loved in days of old,
Weeping they loosed my tresses long
When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
Were you in love when you were young?"--"Alack! Tattiana," she replied,
What bitter tears with thee I shed!
Where is the outlaw, banned by men,
What agitation languidly
When harsh demeanour hath consigned
Where better?
Where harsh frivolity proclaims
Will teach grammatical conceits,
What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,
What say you? to the family--
What is his latest character?
What once I knew is clean forgot--
When all around the entrance pressed,
When deaf and silent he doth lie
What sad emotions o'er me steal
When Passion's fire no longer glows
When first upon my cheek I feel
When hope's delightful flower but bloomed
Where dwelt the Muses' worshipper,
When motionless your gaze beneath
When that time comes, a poem I'll strive
When separation's hour drew nigh,
When the hour came to bid good-bye--
Where Nereids murmur evermore,
Whene'er across the plain at speed
Where long time he in solitude
Where shining runs the tiny brook,
Where my days in the wilderness
Where the first time she met with _him_.Thus widely meditation erred,
Which Autumn late to earth consigned,
Who following Petrarch move along
Whilst from her countenance ne'er stirred
Who secretly denounced the gift,
Who to the youthful hostess bowed,
Where in the country Eugene yet,
        Where man is not.
Where melancholy rocks arise
Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
Whilst all creation seemed to dream
Which in a hilly neighbourhood
Which in the winter were a joy:
Which in your spirit dominates,
Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
Whither departed is the host?
Who early died a gallant death_,"
Who selfishly unmoved remain
Who knows? with love's consuming flame
Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
Where plentifully feelings flow
Where thine equal shall we find?
Wherein love innocently pines.
Where youth ?
Which we experienced long ago.Alas! he loved as in our times
Which glowed with virginal desire.When but a boy he Olga loved
Which of approaching labour tells
Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
Whose glance reflecting inspiration
Whilst struggling for the heritage.Soon Olga's accents shrill resound
Who this soft nonsense could impart,
Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
Whilst the fond parents, friends thro' life,
Who by a haughty word or glance
Who can help loving mother Moscow?
Who may he be? Is it Eugene?
"Who? Is it that stout general, pray?"--Let us congratulations pay
Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
Whom jealous transport cannot move,
Whose memories make the heart beat quick
Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
Whose hearts responsive have remained
"Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
Will to the old times faithful be.Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
With the "Well-Wisher" in her hand!
Thus haughty, careless in her tone?He quits the fashionable throng
Thus her perversity hath shown.
Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
Thus our light race grows up and lives,
Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise
Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,
Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,
Thus the time passes and meanwhile
Thus we began our little tale--
Till absently Vladimir took
Thus to assassinate the eve?"--
Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
Thy cheek is as a poppy red!""Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!"--
Thus, praised be God! a reputation
Till carriage lamps, a double row,
Till amid trees a hovel showed,
Till January fell no snow--
Till out of breath upon a seatShe sank.--
'Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
Time-honoured Kremlin's keys present.
Till the mazurka's close he stays,
Time was the flattering voice of fame,
Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
'Tis done. To supper they proceed.
'Tis evidently Heaven's will
'Tis now the hillock now the rill
Till morn--life uniform but gay,
Time was when cold seduction strove
Time was, his raillery was gay,
Time to denote by dinner, tea,
Tired by the ball's incessant noise,
'Tis Heaven's will and I am thine.
'Tis a scene of romance, I vow!"
'Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
"'Tis habit, Lenski."--"Is your ill
'Tis silent all! Alone the cries
To Lucifer the cock must breathe
'Tis day, the family downstairs,
'Tis fearful to anticipate
'Tis here he slept, his coffee took,
'Tis not so now. Like gentle dames
'Tis something of this sort I deem.
'Tis time for supper, now for bed,
'Tis time she to the altar went!
'Tis time to marry her, 'tis true,
"'Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.
'Tis time to quit this weary shore
To Russ indigenous are not;
"'Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
To accompany him and to escort
To all she answers cruelly--
To a surrender gave consent,
To all good neighbours' sport conduced.
To be in conversation clear
'Tis dreadful--ye agree, I hope--
'Tis finished. Horrible to read!
'Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
'Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee
To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,
'Tis said you are a misanthrope,
'Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
To Olga Petoushkova darts:
To an assembly--she appeared
To captivate her how devoted!
To arm the tongue and e'en the eye,
To bring behind: the triple steeds
To cool the cutlets' seething grease,
To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
To array himself in evening dress.
To bear love's parching agonies--
To burn, yet reason keep awake
To cope with Ay no more I dare,
To dream upon the sunny strand
To ease the anguish of my breast.
To fawn upon and love express;
Unto a carping world must show--
To Eve the universal mother,
To agitate me in my dreams.When, where, and in what desert land,
To arid selfishness resigned,
To anticipate the break of day,
To cock the pistol; barrel bend
To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;
To banish far unworthy themes
To cheat the inexperienced fair,
To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.
To jest as he had done last eve,
To dominate her worthy lord,
To friendship making no pretence,
To lay two covers secretly.
To listen to the rippling rill.
To listen to the words you speak,
To male acquaintances he bows,
To me he would his Olga give,
To my old nurse alone peruse,
To purest love he tuned his note
To end with him her path below.To Love all ages lowly bend,
To idle musing was a prey;
To light had brought them from their dust,
To make wise men the idiot play
To pass with reasonable men
To sketch myself that I have tried
To write of any other elf
To peer into the future tries.
To raise a clamour and a din:
To sketch ye in Albano's style.
To romp and play she ne'er would go:
To take a hand at whist oft come:
To the fair object of his dream,
To whisper comfort, love and hope?
To swagger as the art of love,
To thy decree my will I bend.
To the theatre he repairs
To two young oaks the coachman leads.
To vary for a few brief days.For two whole days it seemed a change
To wander through the meadows still,
To happiness contributing.
To flight before her radiant look,
To guess how you the eve pull through."--
To kiss the feet which I admired!
To labour in his sledge forgot,
To loiter there in idleness
To slay himself with blade or ball,
To follow you in every place,
To freeze his finger hath begun,
To help her to the other shore
To look on life as on a show,
To sigh and meditate alone:
To his Penates now returned,
To lawless love I should prefer--
To mark with a contemptuous smile.
To this arrangement can be seen,
To mention the foregoing eve,
To visit Moscow in the season.
To youthful Olga's beauty bright,
To visit, lovely maid, return,
To move in fashionable life,
To part in amity with thee!
To mutter her concealed desire
To see aught--never mind meanwhile)
To what malicious merriment,
To pass the night at home hath gone.
To see his Olga ere the fray--
To shallow sentiment a slave!
To standards in which we believe?
To stay the maid against her will.
To take this letter to O-- Well!
To the young girl he said adieu,
To watch with lovers' ecstasies,
To whom are our misfortunes grief
To write his forefathers to warn
To secrets of virgins,
To the abandoned dwelling-place.
To the pianoforte he moves
To the sarcastic observation,
To treat the matter as a jest,
To understand by slow degrees
To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
"To whom is it to go, my sweet?
To-day it is my turn to teach.
To-morrow before break of day,
To-day, my friends, at any rate,
To-morrow just like yesterday.
Together moments one or two
Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
When on the pallid eastern sky
To seek him out with bended head.
"To--?"--"Larina."--"Tattiana?"--"So.
To swathe her shoulders in the furs,
Together they returned, nor word
Told me to ask you. Ere that date
Together we have wandered o'er
Torquato Tasso's strains I deem.
'Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,
Tranquil repose. Eugene alone
Transfixed Oneguine mine doth stay.Is this the same Tattiana, say,
Unknown to all, without a tie,
Transparent o'er the Neva beamed
True friend, landlord benevolent,
'Twas not the first time, I can tell
Twice in the year to fast were bound,
'Twould serve ye in an epigram--
"'Twas possible then, happiness--
Two poles together glued by ice,
Two verses he could recollect
Until her heart less high should bound--
Was famous for thick-headedness.Lenski that eve in thought immersed,
Tome of "Malvina," and but three
Too much I'm given to intersperse,
Transported to our Russian clime.
Trembles upon my lips from spite,--
Tortured by pangs of wild regret,
Trembles at artificial shame.The shining pistols are uncased,
Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
Trembling he seeks the young princess--
Triquet arose, and for the bard
Triumphant by anticipation,
Triumphant with the answer come.
'Twas these he read and these alone
Troy's sages should in concert own
Turned to her and discordantly
Turned and replied as it behoved,
Until the sleepless Breguet chime
Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!
Until her powers of running fail.She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell--
When I yon semicircle bright
Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
Two minutes they in silence spent,
Unto her husband, went away--
Undeviating and insane
Undoubtedly, disdain alone
Undressed herself and went to bed
Unhappily too salt by far;
Unseen thou wast already dear.
Unto Anicia for the keys
Unto the hero of this lay
Unless forbidden fruit we eat,
Unto his own Tattiana he,
Unto the gates the servants fly
When Eugene like a ghost did rise
Unto the fields she makes her way,
Unto the windmill he must ride
Upon the ball-room's glassy floor
Unto their solitude one day,
Up to the attic, and all need
Urging your droshkies swift as air
Upon the dreary northern snows,
Upon the tumbled sofa placed,
Use subterfuge, and thus his breast
Vladimir's property, a man
Was the old and forgotten coach;
When captured in a schoolboy's cap;
Vexation? Vanity? or strove
Viewed them with not a little scorn,
Was the first question Olga made,
Was worthy of that old baboon,
"What can be drearier than the house,
Was with himself dissatisfied.In fact, the subject analysed,
Well! just as she was yesterday."Why did you leave last night so soon?"
When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
Visions, now sad, now grateful, long
Was not surprised thereby at all.
Vladimir something curtly said
Was he in health and void of care?--Even so! His passions soon abated,
Was nothing but the British spleen
We called to mind our youthful days--
What everybody long has known;
What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?
What pleasures Hymen would prepare
When in simplicity ye wrote
Where God alone knows whom she met.
Upon a bunch of lovage green;
Upon his couch insensibly;
Upon my lake I love to float,
Upon the earth a mist did lie
Was wont with me at cards to play.
Upon the stage his weary glance.
Upon those margins she perceived
Upward in a thin stream inclines.
Voices and hands applaud, and she
Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
Walking? The landscape tires the eye
We all of us of education
Upon the windows tracery,
Us from the world wherein we live.Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
"Warm yourself here a little space!"
Was it not so?--for thee I gave,
Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;
Verses and tears et cetera.
Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
Was it not thou, O vision bright,
Was the meek love a maiden feels.
Well known unto Oneguine mine.
We visit about Christmas Day,
Was uttered, and the cabin shook--
Were I like you a bard by trade--
Upon the opening page ye find:
Upon her brow sits wrath alone--And it may be a secret dread
Vladimir Lenski visited
Was born beside the Neva, where
What acrimonious scorn I trace
What do I ask? What cause assigned
What will the coming dawn reveal?
When to enlarge we shall succeed,
Which crushing dignity must brook!
Upon your daughters keep an eye,
When in the grand saloon was heard
When will the devil take his own!"
Where every day before his eyes
Which 'neath her pillow lay till morn.
Was drawn, ideal of my lay--
Where all upon the surface lies,--
Where turmoil cannot penetrate,
Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!
Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?
Wherein I buried left my heart.
Wherein I felt love's fatal dart,
Wherein the heart its vows expressed,
Which all her darling friends have scrawled
Wherein the miserable wife
Which might for many ages last.Surely ye all have overhauled
Was sleeping then a sleep like death;
Upon her cheek by adulation
Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
Upon its damp opacity,
Upon the highway of the sea
Vladimir closes up his book,
Was that which we are wont to call
We glide along a floor of wax.
Where fashionable circles meet
Warmth I imagined in your glance,
Wearied of leisure in the end,
Well! Larina appears to us
What I by relatives conceive?
What boots it with the age to strive?
"What is your name?" The boor looked dazed,
When in as instant she is lost,--
When people with long countenance
When shall I wing my passage free
What is thy cleverness to me?
"Well!"--"I the elder should prefer,
When the obedient doll in sport
"What ails thee?"--"Nothing."--He is fled.At home arriving he addressed
When the mazurka used to peal,
When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
Where is he who doth not deceive?
When will my hour of freedom come!
Where many another hand had signed
Wherefore? She found a secret joy
Which in the elevated sphere
Which rankled in Tattiana's breast,
Which rushed in eager dense array
Which your true friend with a sweet smile
Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
Which shines with iridescent hues.
Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet
Whither and wherefore do I speed
Who labours hard to humour us?
Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,
Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
Who thrives this moment as I write,
Who tyrannizes us with ease,
Who with a scuffle and a shout
Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
White Moscow raises her old spires,
Whither at headlong speed doth go
Who dressing-gown and slippers gives
Who to surrender did not blench
Who had for four long years survived
Will sound an insult in your ear.
Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?"--
Who without more prevarication
Who words and actions will adjust
Whose author nature understood
Whose countless golden crosses glow
Will not five centuries exceed
Whose qualities appeared to afford
Whose tones Apollo's sons inspire,
Winter's approach she doth not hail
With better half as cumbersome;
Who would the maiden innocent
Wholly beside herself with fear,
Whom latterly one often meets
Whom pale Diana's ray illumes--
Whom, as the custom is of men,
Will be absorbed by Lethe's stream;
Will happiness replace. My God!
Will he pursue?--But no one came.
With Eugene pranks of former years
With Olga; nor of this appeared
With blessings on the ditches and
With ardent sighs and flattery
With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
With cherries, red currants,
With dance and with song.
With childlike lisp will lie to please.
With gay design and silken stitch.
With hopeless passion: from her bed
With deeper woe than others' grief.
With his own pawn alas! his rook!Homeward returning, he at home
With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
With iridescent wing doth flap
With love which happiness extends;
With great delight.--O God on high!
With hope and then perplexity,
With jealous fire resuscitate,
With me Caucasian rocks beside!
With pallid light, but Eugene lay
With jealous fear, anxiety.
With late repentance gnaws and stings.
With little knowledge and that wrong
With lovers' rubbish filled, was neat
Ye groves whose depths I know so well,
Were stripped with melancholy sound,
What are they? Gladly would I yield
What never was remarked or heard
"What can be done? She is no child!"
What jokes and guesses now abound,
What they in conversation said?--
What! really going? 'Tis too bad!
When evening o'er the landscape looms,
What visions then her fancy thronged--
What a storm of emotions keen
What doth she see? Around the board
What languor would his silence show,
What more's required? The world replies,
What, invitations? The same day
When o'er a glass with friends we prate
When he in ardent verse portrays
Whene'er he had an aching head;
When in her walks abroad she met
When in that company she saw
When in the study's calm retreat,
When poets lachrymose recite
When the same life before him lies
When the sonorous Breguet tells
When youth's rebellious hour drew near
When, sitting by his fire alone
Where I can no more recollect?--
Where each young critic ready stands,
Wherefore am I your quarry held?--
When tea was brought. 'Tis my delight
Whene'er a brilliant courtly dame
Where the first time I saw your face,--
Which lessons unto us repeat,
Where--"--"What! another eclogue spin?
Wherein I castigation get;
Wherein the child of fashion strict
Which never have existed, e'en
Which from the devil's bookcase start,
Which o'er the waters boldly leap,
Whilst he "belle Nina" had the face
Whom thirty centuries adore.I will with thy divinity
Wherein a space Oneguine spent.
Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie
Whereto in language courteous
Wherein we lately left the twain.
Which Ovid once immortalized,
Which afterwards the muse revived.
Which falls in starry flakes below.How in the country pass this time?
Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
Whither that evening he will go.
Whither two neighbouring dames have walked
Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
Why did you visit our poor place?
Which is he? or an imitation,
Whilst cheerily the embers shone,
Whilst the tired serving-men without
Whilst homeward by the nearest route
Whither shall he go first? He'll see,
Whither along them doth he pelt?Oneguine whither gallops? Ye
With affectation,--nothing more.
Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
Who arrived lately from Tamboff,
Who glory, wealth and dignities
Who cannot conjure former joys?
Who reads his visionary theme
_Who in thy love finds more delight
Who, heard the music of my lay,
Winter resigned her empire white,
With all dissatisfaction shows.
With bated breath, around she bends
With boiling torrent dark and gray;
With footsteps tremulous with awe
With loud explosion, the bright wine
With measured step and even gait
With satisfaction marvellous,
With fir-trees standing motionless
With folded arms and eyes bent low,
With one foot resting on its tip
With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
With such a perversity proclaim.
With many a vacancy, 'tis said."--
With effort she restrains. Well nigh
With flame more ardent passion burns,
With his ferocious mate appears.
With thee I conversed when I bore
With jest and gossip gaily blent.
With tears which secret sufferers love--
With tears, confused emotions, bliss,--With unanimity complete,
Without disgust we look upon?Happy he who in youth was young,
Without grammatical mistakes.
Would whisper: shall I so long live?"--
With what avidity and zest
With worldly honours, it may be,
Within her; she is sick at heart;
Within his mind Tattiana bore,
Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
Writ in my honour now and then--
Yea! although rendered beauteous
Who dreams expound and prophecies.Brought by a pedlar vagabond
Who every gesture, every phrase
Who floats contentedly through life,
"Who would have thought it? As of yore!
Whom you in slumber may have seen."But she, her sister never heeding,
Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
With pungent or obtuse retort,
With quite a lachrymose expression
With her they did associate,
Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
"Who will be there?"--"The family.
Whose memory doth not refuse
With Ozeroff was wont to share
With intellect and strong volition
With this unpleasant _tete-a-tete_,
Who the romance do not complete,
Who from two years to thirty tell;
Who now could fail to recognize
Whose hands indulgently caress
Will pass; the same to-morrow try--
Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
With all their progeny were there,
With an imagination wild,
With hisses Cleopatra scares,
With mute appeal to ask they seem--
With taffety instead of crape.Having abjured the haunts of men,
With scandal's trivial ornament.
With tenderness hath recognized
With us is easily attained.
Would she the canvas tight enrich
Who in the agony of grief
Whom autocratic fate's decrees
Winter! The peasant blithely goes
With Martin Zadeka. In woe
Whose heart experience icy made
With humble prose I'll fill my page
With lengthened howl and accent loud,
With raspberries, cherries.
With intellect, a taste refined,
With its exhilarating flow,
With purple hand Aurora leads,
Within his memory there lay,
With so much warmth and intellect?
With thoughts of a far distant land,
With which blind Fortune oft betrays
With words of foreign origin
Within his sledge the stiffened corse,
Within its wave the sounding pail,
Within that secret court discussed,
Would she in silence long remain.Contemplativeness, her delight,
Within resounded shriek and shout:
Without a chance to slip away.
Yawning betook him to a pen.
Without amaze or wrath displayed:
Without constraint in conversation
Without them Eugene is complete;
Without disguise ourselves explain.
With him were friends eternally:
Will you?"--"Agreed."--"I thank you, friend,"
With "vale" finish off a note;
With bitter tears my mother prayed,
With blunted pencil-point adorns.
With epigrams impertinent,
With book in hand reclined in bed,
With eye precise and without fail.
With his exasperated sense,
With laughter smothered weariness:
With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
With clouded brow stands silently?
With inexact pronunciation
With rapturous longing he awaits,
With many a snare their pathway line!
With roses, caps and looks malign;
With sad refrain misfortune near.
With tranquil air Oneguine leads
With it may be a couple more;
With serious air then went away
With shame I shudder and with dread--
Without profession, business, wife,
With spiritual tenderness;
With the epistle of my fair;
With this immoderate request
Within my memory I bore
With tumult or contentment still
Without enthusiasm he met
Ye well-known mountain summits high,
With our Oneguine doth aspire
With us 'tis quite a novelty
Would loiter by the looking-glass,
Ye billows of blue Hadria's sea,
Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?Perchance to benefit mankind,
Ye golden days of my young spring?
Ye mothers also, caution use,
Ye need dissimulation base
"Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!
Yea! and a man of honour, lo!
Ye shadows of a life more high,
Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,
Yes! every one must have his foes,
Yes! for our unpretending home,
Without participation hears,
Without the faintest trace to leave
Without the ken of parents both,
Without the least constraint he bowed.
Would agitate a mystic wreath
Would at the proper time appear.How well he played the greenhorn's part
Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
Yet as a rule their talk I call
Would you to me this Phyllis show,
Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
Ye feel but little interest,
Ye men of fashion cynical,
Yet clearer shines than every light
Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,
You o'er your wine insulted hath--
Would haste in agitation dire
Would lose his slippers or gazette.Time flies! a genial air abroad,
Would once in powdered wig appear;
Wrapt in oblivion complete,
Years have inclined me to stern prose,
Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,
Yet let us part in friendship, O
Yon silly moon upon the brink
You fall in love again. But still--
Yonder the household lad doth run,
You choose."--"But who is she?"--"My wife.""So thou art wed! I did not know.
"You have a letter to me sent.
You never since your nose have shown.
Yes, happy--though she at his side
Yet neither Virgil nor Racine
Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
Yet still apparently aspire
Yet satiated with success,
Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
Yet still remains the old despair.
Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
Yet I in idleness expend
Yet sometimes pages two or three
Yet suffering emotional
Yet sometimes this or that deceit
Yet was her inmost soul o'erjoyed
You never would have heard the name,
Yet viewing her from head to foot,
Yet with a feigned frigidity
You in the least commiserate
Young ladies' faces and their feet.
Your conversation cold and hard,
Your heart possesses, I know well,
You know that I am now a fool--
You will not all abandon me.
You with stern countenance declare
You'll find her portrait there, I vouch;
You'll spend your winter famously!
You, he a noble mind disclosed,
Young ladies in a vasty curve,
"Your fashionable world I hate,
Your frankness I shall compensate
Your innocent and charming note
Young ladies, if ye ever strove
Your magic voices I shall greet,
"Your second you have left behind!"
Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,
Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
Zaretski rose, nor would explain,
Youth freshens beneath Passion's showers,
Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot
Zaretski paces thirty-two
Zaretski, village mechanician,
Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,
Zaretski shouted: "Why, he's killed!"--
Zaretski with a knowing grin,
Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,
Zaretski, once a bully bold,



A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent
A Russian household simple quite,
A Russian in Childe Harold's cloak,
A Russian poem's mechanism
A Vampire fond of meditation,
A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.
A ball here, there a children's treat,
A ball in Peter's capital,
A bastard fame prohibited?
A bearded postillion astride
A beau is for Tattiana found!
A beauty languidly at rest,
A bill of fare hangs full in sight
A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
A blood-bespattered shade would rise,
A boat with splashing oar floats by,
A bogy conjured up in joke,
A book at early morn perused.
A bottle of a vintage white
A box of terrible import.
A breathless silence then, prolonged--
A bristly bear of monstrous size!
A canine face with horns thereon,
A careless looker-on estranged
A case of books he doth obtain--
A certain little escapade
A charm with it in conversation.
A child devoid of childishness
A constant harping on one tune,
A countenance perplexed and scared.
A country damsel's album trim,
A crab upon a spider rides,
A critic of the stage malicious,
A cup of tea upon a tray.
A curious interest disclose
A dagger, asterisk, or note
A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,
A deadly pallor, air distressed;
A dinner, whimsical each course,
A door he opens. But why shrank
A double force unto their song
A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
A due which must to earth be paid.The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
A duellist of classic mind,
A dwarf adorned with tail, again
A dying man with art to soothe,
A faithful model she appeared
A feeble version read below,
A few of different temper deemed,
A fiery and eccentric mind,
A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
A finished madrigal would frame
A first success light pinions gave,
A flimsy trace of musings past
A fond and careful mother been.
A fop, in dress pedantical.
A forest now she sees in front
A fragile bridge and insecure,
A friar black approaching near,
A friendly hand thy life hath ta'en!
A gambling troop when he controlled,
A game of chess would often play,
A garden by a shining rill.
A grammar, likewise Petriads two,
A gust of passion never tore
A hand of ice appeared to seize
A happy destiny ordained:
A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
A hemisphere beneath her sway,
A hermit's life Oneguine led,
A hidden meaning could impart,
A hidden train of wild desire.
A horse's hoofs she hears--She shrinks!
A hundred times will not repeat,
A jolly song and distant horn;
A journey to Moscow! To see the world!
A joyous troop of little boys
A kerchief round her silver hair
A labour, torment, yet a joy,
A lady draws the hostess near,
A lady's hand doth never kiss.
A lancer captivates her heart!
A lancer her soul dotes upon:
A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,
A lethargy of sense, a trance,
A letter for her hero meant:
A life in common with the rest;
A life of fact, not fiction, led--
A little Juvenal to spout,
A little farther please to read
A little virgin mirror peeps.
A load of care upon the maid."But lo! forth from the valleys dun
A loaded pistol in his hand."Advance!"--
A love epistle he doth scrawl.
A love which knew no limitation,
A lover's letter might convey,
A maid hath oft, may yet again
A maiden's secrets--of the heart.Triumphs--their own or those of friends--
A mansion--by the window, see!
A marriageable maid matured,
A mien unaltered she preserved,
A mild quotation to translate,
A million bipeds reckons thus
A modern Regulus unchained,
A moment effervescing stirs,
A mournful temper on his Muse.
A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
A new acquaintance we must scan.
A new proprietor arrived,
A new world was made manifest!Although we know that Eugene had
A noted fop who gambled hard.Like his, her dress was always nice,
A notoriety proclaimed,
A novel in Lafontaine's style,
A nursling yet for Hope to school.
A pair of bullets--nought beside--
A pair; though desolate my mind,
A paragon of virtue he!
A passing snowstorm wreathed away
A passionate desire to bend
A pensive sorrow in her glance
A philosophic anchorite:
A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,
A pleasure though with sorrow knit:
A print without the picture's grace,
A promenade in twilight late
A prudent man like you and brave
A register of fleeting thought,
A riding whip. She strolls along.
A ring she heard the ancient strain:
A rivulet beneath them shoots
A scant attendance Lenski showed
A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
A sense of social delight,
A shape half cat and half a crane.Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:
A simple tombstone hath been set.There, when the rains of spring we mark
A single being: 'twas in fine
A slave of actresses capricious,
A smile from slumbering nature clear
A something somehow have obtained,
A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
A sportsman who in covert lies.But finally she heaves a sigh,
A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.To consanguineous dinners they
A stream, by winter's ice unbound,
A strong resemblance these possess--
A substitute for lamps we hail!Obedient she had ever been
A table to the fire is brought,
A tangled wilderness around.
A tender couplet he combined,
A thick immense neglected grove
A timid love to banishment?--
A timid, shrinking love to grieve.
A tombstone, Aphrodite's shrine,
A trifle pale, a trifle lean,
A trouble fell upon the sprites;
A true Childe Harold my Eugene
A true account and in detail.But not at present, though sincerely
A valuable hostage gained,
A very troublesome disease,
A victim decked with golden leaves;
A village and beneath, a wood,
A vision desolate and drear
A visionary mortified,
A visionary personage
A weary season was at hand--
A while ago the winter spent,
A whisper runs along the hall,
A white and undulating pall
A wild enthusiastic tongue,
A windmill too a jig performs
A wish from place to place to roam,
A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
A worthy object 'tis, and well
A young Armida's lips to press,
A young and handsome galliard.
A young man motionless he saw,
Abandon cities riotous,
"Abandon hope for ever here!"
Abandoned he his country seat,
Abandoning insane delight,
About the crop of hay, the wine,
About the rain and flax and cattle."--
Above the ashes of the dead.
Above the humble urn of death.
Above the yawning grave would fight,--
Absorbed in melancholy mood
Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
Accelerates her hasty pace,
Accents of rapture or despair
Acquaintance instantly to make.
Across her youth a shade had come,
Across the Baltic's salt sea waves,
Across the gloom of heaven would sail
Across the smiling face of dawn.Alas! Tattiana fades away,
Across the stage still madly sweep,
Address to you one single phrase
"Adieu! thou home where peace abides,
Adieu! whate'er thou didst desire
Adieu, thou witness of our glory,
Admired his judgment, which was fine,
Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
Adorned with many a vision bright
Adroitly seized and carried her;
Afar is borne by cruel fate,
Afar, where clothed in green and gold
Affection how did you requite?
_Affectionately yours till death_.
After the wedded couple strain;
Again a century should scourge
Again her rural life she sought,
Again imagination blazed,
Again in her ethereal dance?
Again the giddy waltz repeats.
Again the plague of boyhood--love?The hours once more Oneguine counts,
Against my inclination, friends,
Age immature averse to cheat--
Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
Ah! I still struggle to forget
Ah! I'm so weak--my throbbing breast!
Ah! brethren, what was my delight
"Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!
Ah! he has gone the other way"--
Ah! it may be, affection true
"Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!
Ah! than a spectre from the dead
Ah! what hath fate not torn away!
Akulka who was once Celine,
Alarm the winter journey gave.The date was fixed though oft postponed,
Alarmed by jealous agonies:
Alas! It is not hard to guess.
Alas! abroad I cannot go.
"Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
Alas! for now before her passed
Alas! how wretched now my lot!"
"Alas! my friend, no revenue!"
Alas! my friends, the years flit by
Alas! she is as hard, behold,
Alas! the friend of childish days
Alas! the youthful lover slain,
Alas! with merited reproach.
Albums magnificent which scare
Alike by sighs and flattery.
"Aline!"
All Nature winter seemed to await,
All about Olga--to a light
All are amazed; but Lenski he
All are constrained and fetters bear,
All arise. To the door he goes.Terror assails her. Hastily
All breathless and without replies.
All covered up with snow in heaps,
All dark and silent hath become;
All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
All in the good old style appears,
All mothers their sweet girls believed
All overtures of friendship ended.
All rattled in the ball-room vast,
All silently hung down his head.
All slumber. In the drawing-room
All so distinct, and all so white!
All sons of mental weariness.Eight rubbers were already played,
All that a poet could desire,
All that industrial London brings
All that perfection could desire;
All that the heart would fain express--
All the creations which below
All the young people round about,
All this I know is out of date,
All this in many cases brings
All this may be an empty dream,
All this was novel to Eugene.
All this, my friends, translate aright:
All to the doctors Eugene send,
All to the grand saloon are gone--
All vanished as an echo goes.
All visited him at first, of course;
All which caprice and affluence craves,
All which in Paris eager taste,
All with urbanity betray,
Allure the young gallant
Almost became a poet say--
Alone amid possessions great,
Alone beneath your rooftree stay
Alone beside it, gray and bent,
Alone he doth his claret drink,
Alone she gallops on her steed,
Alone the princess sitteth there,
Alone with my Venetian maid,
Alone within his habitation
Along Saint Petersburg's paved streets,
Along the Neva's bank he sleighs,
Along the hall, and high above
Already Autumn chilled the sky,
Already by repentance moved
Already dance to song proceeds;
Already he grew phthisical.
Already sings the nightingale.
Also my wretched liberty
Also one Viazemski, remarking
Also the works of Fontenelle,
Also their feet--yet ne'ertheless
Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,
Also, to equalise the scales,
Although her book did not contain
Although it will not bear translation,
Although the destined coffin nears,
Although unknown to fame mayhap,
Although we read him heaps of verse.
Always together, eventide
Am I to go through the whole list?""How dull you are this morning, nurse!"
Amazed at the confusing crowd,
Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
Amid a serious disputation,
Amid coquettes who pray to God
Amid submissive herds of men
Amid the awful emptiness
Amid the company career.
Amid the snowdrifts which surround
Amid the soulless sons of pride
Amidst successes flattering
Among some ancient ballads thrust,
Amy Petrovna  utters lies,
An ace at fifteen paces bored.
An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
An almanac but eight years old.
An ancient lady full of grace.--
An ardent heart and yet so mild?--
An ear to my confession lend;
An ever transcendental flight;
An exile from their troublous reign,
An explanation: she was scared,
An honourable course ye took,
An hour passed by--another--till,
An idle anchorite and sad,
An infant maiden doth exhort
An inn at every stage erect.But now, what wretched roads one sees,
An innate love of meditation,
An invalid from lung complaint.
An oval countenance and pink,
And  they
And "Agathon" replied, amazed.
And Christian folk will, I expect,
And Comet champagne foaming flows.
And Eugene ever in her soul
And Eugene soon discovered there
And Flianoff, pensioned councillor,
And Flianoff, somewhat indisposed,
And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
And I admired their common sense
And I confess that now-a-days
And I discerned through Fancy's prism
And I to give thee cakes was wont?"--
And I, amid the friendly crowd,
And I, remembering Svetlana,
And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
And Lenski followed--a light broke--
And Lenski, closing his left eye,
And Limburg cheese alive and old
And Moscow many a beauty fair:
And Schiller read by candlelight.
And Tania's husband soon appeared.--
And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
And a boy handed round the cream.
And a determined disposition,
And a grand festival proceeds.
And a guitar produced we see,
And a half rubles down gave she;
And a long time about her talked.
And a malicious epigram
And a new diadem supplied.
And a romance in ancient style
And abject slaves who kiss the rod;
And about dawn upon his breast
And after Albion's proud lyre
And after them at headlong pace
And agitate my heart again;
And aimless journeys did commence--
And all in snow is buried deep.The wood she enters--bear behind,--
And all that from thy hand proceeds--
And all the joys which Winter knows.
And all the three to breakfast went;
And all thy precious elegies,
And all with one accord agreed,
And all without her husband's leave.
And all your love on self bestow;
And alphabetically tries
And also fashionable beaux.Our hero stops and doth alight,
And also that my feeble verse--
And an elegiac poem wrote.
And an enchanting shoulder shines
And an encouragement did breathe
And an habitual sense of pain;
And an old gent the poet marking
And ancient usages observed
And as a country damsel roved,
And at economy was great;
And at the altar of their fame
And at the stages bugs and fleas
And at the table sat her down.To tragedy, the fainting fit,
And barely visible the smoke
And be as happy--as I might.
And be not in advance severe.
And beats with rapid foot the floor.
And beckon to the passing sails.
And bends her mirror on the moon,
And better, if I judge aright;
And bitter tears of fright I shed.
And bitter torment never known.
And bless mankind with full delight.
And blest me, sinking to the grave.
And blest the shadows of the night."To-morrow's dawn will glimmer gray,
And blush to own himself reflect.
And boiling o'er with friendly heat,
And both of dull existence tired,
And breathe a drama in his ear.
And breathe the balmy breath of night;
And breathes upon the chilly glass,
And brooding o'er the ills he bore,
And buried deep in meditation,
And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
And by a partial temper stirred
And by a sweet delusion he
And by that shady rivulet
And by the fiddle's rushing sound
And by the world repeated oft,
And calmly sleeps the hours away,
And can it be? But late a child
And cannot anything conceal,
And care but little for its ends.
And cares not farther to proceed;
And chattering loud sit down to dine.Ceased for a space all chattering.
And clad in airy costume took
And comfort of each country dame,
And consolation soon begot.
And contemplative dreaminess;
And cool sagacious mind he had:
And courtier, fop, and usurer
And cried within myself: 'tis he!
And crossed with trembling hand the maid."I am in love," her whispers tell
And cry: he was a poet great!
And dames of fine organisations,
And dark and drear the evenings were,
And death before the husband wide
And deem the world perfection is!
And devastate the woods around.There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!
And disappear in space; then she
And distance interposed in vain,
And ditties of the steppe she loved.
And dost thou know her?"--"We live near."
And dream of life's delightful dawn?The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
And due precautions take betimes.
And ease and fashionable waste,--
And ease the tortures of the heart--
And education runs to waste,
And endless the cotillon seemed
And enmity and hope and love--
And every morning I awake
And every year distributed
And exclamations and good cheer.
And exclamations interlaced."Princesse, mon ange!"--"Pachette!"--
And eye which gleams with inspiration--
And far removed from rumour vain;
And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,
And fashion's gay frivolities;
And fashionable magazines,
And female tears hysterical,
And fields my joys have ever been;
And finally he deigns let fall
And finally, upon his bed
And fits of coughing racked her chest.By the sick lady's gaiety
And fled afar--she followed me.
And flooded all the level ground.
And flowed harmoniously. He took
And following them ye might espy
And for Tattiana, mournful maid,
And for a time our course delay,
And form a network left and right;
And freezing fits of weariness.
And from his dressing-room would pass
And from the Millionaya afar
And from the country all around
And from the misty woodland nigh
And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.
And full of innocent delight,
And gallicisms I love as well
And galloped home. But pistols twain,
And gallops to her house away.
And gave himself but little pain
And gazed around with eyes of flame;
And gently hovered o'er my head?
And glasses unemployed all night;
And glittering simpletons beside;Amid sly, pusillanimous
And gloomy epigrams malicious.How oft, when on a summer night
And golden Autumn draweth nigh,
And gossip of the town and fashion
And gradually day unfolds.
And grant his weary bones their rest
And grant success to labour long;
And grasp a stirrup fortunate--
And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit
And grown more curious by far
And had with waddling in the end
And handsome countenance combined,
And happy unto you appear.
And hark! the clank of spurs is heard
And harmony was soon restored.
And hastened to his uncle's side,
And hat surnamed a "Bolivar"
And hated casual visitors,
And hates the world's discordant ways.
And he had made her heart beat quick!
And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
And he who, jealousy disarmed,
And heard a voice cry--_Why! He's killed!_--
And heedless of approval seems,
And her bespangled robe doth wave
And her upon the threshold laid.Recovering, Tania gazes round;
And her voice sweeter than the sounds
And herds of oxen wandering low;
And his poor basten sandal knits.
And his strange conduct at the dance
And homeward like an arrow tore.My friends, the poet ye regret!
And honestly 'tis my belief
And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
And hot with jealous indignation,
And hurried home his awful freight.
And husbands' tedious amity?
And if Tattiana mine had found--
And impiously should declare,
And in a vision, sinless, bright,
And in a whisper did repeat:
And in her conversation drawled.
And in her grasp the letter shakes,
And in her hand a French romance.
And in her languid bosom raise
And in her native language she
And in society might shed
And in the Summer Garden rove.
And in the bathroom did command
And in the final tome we learnt,
And in the frosty night alone
And in the morning doth not know
And irrigate them with champagne;
And irritates the appetite.
And is all light within destroyed?
"And is it long since back he came?
"And is it she? It must be--no--
And is it true and not a jest,
And is it true her garland bright
And isolated from all men,
And jests doth recapitulate.
And jolting jarred the window-frames.
And judgment which unsteady veers
And kindness Tania was impressed,
And leads a solitary life?
And leaning 'gainst the portal closed
And leans upon the monster's arm,
And leave a marsh the fertile ground
And led me off to church with song."
And lessons to his children read.
And life and fate in turn selected
And like Childe Harold gloomily
And like Napoleons each of us
And like a palisade flit by.
And like a shadow haunted her.
And like his shadow dogged his life,
And like the prisoner's our delight
And linen on him doth bestow.
And lo! five paces more they pass,
And lo! he is already there!
And lo! where lies a marble tomb
And lonely through the forest creeps.""Is she in love?" quoth one. "With whom?
And long internal agitation
And long perukes hath vanished.
And love's delicious diadem
And loves you as--a relative!Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
And madrigals I'm asked to write!
And make a dark existence shine
And many a caravan on high
And many a day thereafter laid
And many another slily sneered;
And marking Tania's agitation,
And marvels deemed he thus should view.
And may fall headlong any time.
And meditative from the spot
And meditative homeward goes,
And mental elasticity.
And modest, cheerful as the morn,
And more imagination teems.
And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?'Twas eve. 'Twas dusk. The river speeds
And my Eugene the path must trace--
And my dark soul to light was brought;
And my romance's open theme
And naked uniformity.
And natural benevolence,
And necessary fools allowed.
And never hath our language proud
And never was the ear affright
And no ridiculous report,
And not a speck of dirt descried.
And nothing more important sees;
And now 'tis night, the guardian moon
And now a fickle flirt and wild,
And now he views forgotten foes,
And now his youthful heart desires
And now philanthropy his soul,
And now she skips and now she springs
And now upon the snow in thaw
And now we hear delightedly
And now, I mournfully confess,
And o'er the granite coping bent,
And of the attic. Honestly,
And of the irksome harness tires,
And oft at eventide a throng
And oft in whispers would impart
And oft its Dictionary thumb.
And oh! what verses, what delights,
And on the footstool sitting down
And on the last one, underlined:
And others rise ephemeral!
And ought he not to disregard
And our successors soon shall drive
And our swift troikas never tire;
And overcome antipathies
And pallid nature trembling grieves,
And past the threshold of decay,
And pauses oft to serve out bread.
And pelt him with cherries,
And physic bring with mournful face,
And platitudes and pedantry,
And pleasure's daily blandishment,
And pressed her hand--the crimson blush
And privileges nice allowed,
And rapid whirl of many feet,
And reached, with nought his mind to engage,
And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!
And read our newspapers scarce ever,
And reads with rapid eager eye
And rest from bygone days of strife.But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,
And ringing wine-glasses are plied.
And rising from her bench proceeds;
And roofs near morn blanched o'er with snow;
And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.I like this word exceedingly
And sallied forth one brilliant morn--
And satisfied with vengeance ta'en.
And saying this Vladimir drained
And scanned in silence its content.
And secretly their views expound.
And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.
And sermon--but in that dread hour
And shall adopt some new caprice.
And she at last hath us deceived;
And she despite herself would waste
And she to whom my lyre would fain,
And shorter had the days become.
And showed with an uncertain light
And shut him in a lonely nook.He read as vainly as before,
And silent as the maid Svetlana
And silently I here must die--
And since I pulled thee by the ear--
And slowly life coagulates--
And so Tattiana was her name,
And so departed. But Eugene,
And so--God bless them, if He list.In this the love of the fair sex
And solitude and calm delight,
And solitude and calm delight.
And sometimes into snares as well
And soon Lel hovered o'er her head.
And soon Oneguine's door beside
And soon imagination threw
And soon the friendly troop hath fled.They in a peaceful life preserved
And spectacles, his knitting staid
And spouted it with lyric fire--
And spur my spirit's torpid mood!
And starting suddenly doth say:
And stay whose length none recollects.
And still the coachmen round the fires
And stoves of various shapes abound.
And straight returning whence he came,
And stupid censors passionate;
And such unconsciously he led,
And sulked in silent indignation;
And supercilious dames she glides,
And supper. In the country we
And swifter than the swallow's flight.
And tears of reconciliation:
And terrify a swarm of ducks,
And testy gamesters do engage
And that a bottle sealed with tar
And that no longer could inspire.
And that too often we receive
And that unrivalled paragon,
And the Skatenines, aged pair,
And the attendants called in haste.
And the bad book accompanies.
And the cast-iron statuette
And the cold beauties of the season:
And the conviction soon arose,
And the dark fringe of men, like frames
And the eternal lorgnette through
And the extent of his caprice;
And the fair sex as light as down!
And the far mountains daintily
And the heart's agitated dreams.
And the kind-hearted servitors:
And the lime alley's twilight dim
And the lone secret of her heart,
And the more surely we ensnare
And the newcomers welcome bade.
And the old nurse a brief prayer said
And the recesses of my mind
And the sagacious Triquet back
And the saloon threw open wide;
And the suspicious veteran old,
And the world met her smilingly,
And the young damsel from the town,
And the young girl appeared before
And the young ladies fortunes told,
And the young revellers of past times
And then "monsieur" supplied her place;
And then a cup of coffee drank,
And then made merry pope and guest,
And then she soon 'twixt work and leisure
And then the stanzas of my theme
And then to meditate for days
And then with blind credulity
And these the attentive maid observed
And they the waters recommend.He went not--sooner was prepared
And think: here lies who loved me well,
And this fifth canto ought to be
And this the faithful one allows,
And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;
And thou, persistent to the end,
And thou, youth's early inspiration,
And though I read it with distress,
And though her soul might be confused,
And though perchance a lady may
And thoughtlessness to woe might lead."Thus did our friend Oneguine preach:
And thoughts of Olga first impressed
And through the lofty windows views
And thus ancestral dust reveres.
And thus each stubbornly proceeds.
And thus he never fell among
And thus he spent eight years of time,
And thus in season the rich field
And thus it is 'twould cause me pain
And thus secures the prey we seek.
And thus unto her nurse did say:"Nurse, 'tis so close I cannot rest.
And thy inebriating wave
And thy protection I implore.
And tiresome rogues ridiculous
And to Oneguine far away
And to revive Tattiana seemed.The chairs are thrust back with a roar,
And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
And to the field of honour led;
And to these letters and these tears.
And town and friends forgotten quite.This northern summer of our own,
And traces with a slender finger
And triumphs in career erotic.
And true, his pistol's faultless aim
And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
And turned aside the drapery;
And turned to leave immediately,
And two old pines their branches spread--
And unto whom we all allude
And usually despised it too),
And vanish like a bird in air.Full many a lovely star hath night
And various chords upon it proves,
And vehemently though amazed
And viewed the door with cunning eye.All bustle when he makes a sign:
And views amongst themselves advance
And visit many a foreign clime,
And vows will probably be signed:
And wakened him with the loud cry:
And watch her eye's full glance to meet.
And we--an unattractive set--
And well-instructed to betray!
And what from its recess appears?
And what like menaces fatigues,
And what resulted? Drunk with love,
And what she from the cards inferred.
And what the old man might bequeath.And in reality one day
And what will Destiny concede?"Farther Tattiana's walks extend--
And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
And when for Olga nurse arrayed
And when her violence reviewed--
And when the watery mirror gleamed
And where Thalia softly dreams
And where a madrigal occurs
And where at last his bones repose
And where may be her sister now?
And where tempestuous love's desires,
And where the admirable streams
And where the billows hoarsely raise
And wheresoe'er thy footsteps err,
And who is not a tiresome thief?
And who the rent-roll of his race
And wholly occupied his day--
And wild among them grew her words--
And wild festivities among
And wildly waves its arms and storms;
And wisely gallops to the hill.
And wished to say to him farewell.
And with emotional delight
And with gray hair ambrosial
And with his lot in life content,
And with remorseful anguish filled,
And would by candlelight arise.Romances pleased her from the first,
And yet he in your cause would strive
And yet oblivion forbade.
And you, O maids immaculate,
And you, my youthful damsels fair,
And youthful madness, youthful fires.The gulf between them was so vast,
And, by the light the moonbeams gave,
And, by the way, I here assert
And, hanging down her head, the maid
And, heaving a regretful sigh,
And, inspiration firing me,
And, joy of souls effeminate,
And, sobbing at your feet, to blend
And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
Anew the flames of passion start
Angel or fiend malevolent.
Anicia soon appears, the door
Announcing to him dinner-time.
Another bard with art divine
Another could her heart engage,
Another could her woe assuage
Another his betrothed was given;
Another passed; 'twas just the same.
Another tribune of the ball
Another visit hastes to pay.
Another with cock's head appeared,
Another! to none other I
Anticipating woe she pined,
Antiquity no pleasure gave,
Appear attuned to softer chords;
Appear; along the road of Tver
Appeared, Don's effervescing boast,
Applause, the people's donative.
Approach not to gaze at
Approach not to hearken
Approach, approach; I am thine own."Thus in a style _obscure_ and _stale_,
Approaches Olga and the pair
Are admirable, my dear friend,
Are all your relatives quite well?
Are not with elegance impressed.
Are oft deceptive--like their feet.Where is Oneguine? Half asleep,
Are turned upon her. All combine
Are ye replaced by other maids
Around her neck, now violently
Around my stanzas incomplete
Around the carriage of the pair--
Around the garden homeward hies.
Around the meadow and the grove.
Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
Aroused Tattiana from her bed.
Aroused in him some tenderness.
Aroused in him sweet reverie.
Arouses rustics from their sleep.
Arrange without the least delay--
As Saadi anciently averred--
As Winter in their purity,
As a babe's slumber, or the light
As a poetic life serene,
As bees who leave their dainty store
As butterflies to blossoms cling.
As cyphers others to appraise,
As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,
As deaf and silly doth remain,
As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
As every journal now entreats,
As formerly much agitation.
As formerly the shepherd sits
As giddy youth's hilarity--
As hope uncertain and as sweet,
As if he cruelly had joked!'Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
As if impossible it were
As if it were some funeral feast.
As if some troubled dream she dreamed.
As if with eider-down is filled.
As in a garden when I grew,
As in a thicket's humble shade,
As in her heart the thought sank home,
As in some frenzied dream of fear
As in the timid forest deer,
As in their turn the seasons roll.
As it were, tore himself away.
As lordly mansions ought to be,
As many dinners I rehearse,
As many entertainments be!
As men who much had done that day.
As oft to meat and drink advert,
As on the rapid wings of thought
As once, to fill the rapid page
As one who bivouacs afield,
As partner of my mournful days,
As rosy lips without a smile,
As storms which in chill autumn rage
As the reflection of his age,
As the sins of my youthful days
As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,
As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
As to a worthy man and good!But sad is the reflection made,
As vernal storms the fields athwart.
As we lure the young gallant,
As when the tempest's veil is drawn
As with innumerable fires.
As yet none had discovered aught;
As your light footprints on the green.Diana's bosom, Flora's cheeks,
Aside she casts her veil of gauze
Aside the foes their mantles threw,
Assemble from the neighbourhood:
Assemblies oligarchical
Assigned a lodging, from the hall
Assistance ever will extend,
Assuredly should not have been
Asunder was and hate prepared?
At Larina's abode produced
"At Larina's."--"Hem, that is queer!
At Russ she was by no means clever
At a great feast against desire,
At an old aunt's they had arrived
At each extreme one takes his stand,
At early morn returns the maid
At eighteen not to play the fool!
At eventide would hither come,
At fifty who relief obtained
At first for books was disinclined,
At first such contradictions wrought
At first, I clung to secrecy:
At first, but soon became inured
At forty suffered from the gout,
At his pale brow a shot to have,
At last became a ruined man.
At last is shrunk and withered quite?
At last my father gave his blessing,
At last the author!" cries Mamma.
At least by show of sympathy;
At least their accents and their words
At morn I must assuredly
At morn an icy bath within
At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
At neighbouring hospitalities.
At prisoner's base she never played.
At seven in summer rose from bed,
At table she was sitting by
At the front gates, but in brief space
At the same hour she oped her eyes
At thirty who was married well,
At this time almost understood.
At times my reason almost bends,
At times talk nonsense with design;
At times three words to him addressed
At times to silence would resort,
At times, if only once a week,
At twenty who was prig or swell,
At womankind he growled a curse,
Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
Athwart the snow four paces came--
Attend in male attire arrayed.On this artistical retreat
Attentive be unto my rhymes
Attentive listened to his speech,
Attentive listened to the lad.But more the passions occupy
Attentive to the echoing sound,
Attentive to the heart's first beating,
Attractive in its banefulness?
Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
Aurora's ruddy rays of light--
Authors replete with sacred fire
Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?
Avenge himself in proper style.
Avowal then 'twas time to pray,
Await the long-delayed caress.
Awaiting on the shore I roam
Awakens secret merriment
Away her golden earrings tore;
Away! and cease to ring their praise
Away, Tattiana, hath been ta'en.
Awhile sound conversation seems
Awhile this beauty captivated,
Aye bids ye in some way or other--
Back to his regiment must roam.
Baggage is heaped up in a mound,
Balconies, lion's heads on doors,
Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
            Baratynski
Bard of the "Feasts," and mournful breast,
Bard of the Finnish maiden young.
Barely to draw her breath she seems,
Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
Barking, young ladies' osculations,
Basins and jugs--well! everything
Bear gone--she at the threshold placed;
Beats that of friends and relatives:
Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
Because a member I became.Once more to idleness consigned,
Because he could not gourmandise
Because he yawned at the bare view
Because her passion wanted art,
Because in singleness of thought
Because my lord, in battles maimed,
Because she was so innocent,
Become a faithful wife and e'en
Become alarmed. So never mind!
Bedding is laid out and to all
Before a cold indifferent crowd,
Before a fire which feebly glows
Before he eighteen years attained.Since Eugene in that solitude
Before her straight with roguish eyes.
Before him her wild game of chance.
Before him red roast beef is seen
Before it ran a stream. Behold!
Before such fond simplicity
Before the altar, lo! the pair,
Before the dregs they shall divine
Before whom once in solitude,
Before whose inexperienced sight
Before you agonized to die--
Begins to talk of this and that,
Behind her a grave general.
Behind the mill. Meantime ye see
Behind the mountain sank the moon.
Behind, of glasses an array,
Behold her downcast eyes which glow,
"Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;
Behold the dames who once were fine
Behold! beside their dwelling groups
Behold! green tables are brought forth,
Behold! orthography despising,
Behold! than polished floor more nice
Behold! the moon was shining bright
Behold! the world's opinion!
Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain--"
Behold, the crowd begins to stir,
Being from hell or heaven sent,
Believe me, of my present shame
Believed, the people's wisdom weird,
Beneath a cross and shrubbery.
Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,
Beneath her downy pillow placed,
Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,
Beneath her parents' eyes the maid
Beneath her roaring opened wide:
Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
Beneath his lips' devouring kiss.
Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
Beneath the flag of Quietude,
Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
Beneath the sheltering oak tree's shade
Beneath the silver of the moon
Beneath the table-cloth of white,
Beneath the window-sill his bed,
Beside a nameless rivulet,
Beside his Olga doth he grieve,
Beside our youthful heroine fair,
Beside the cup she sang her rhymes
Beside the stormy sea one day
Beside the thundering abyss
Besides the hobbies of a spouse
Besides, a duellist well-known
Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
Better than Chateaubriand did
Between myself and my Eugene,
Between the blanc-mange and the roast;
Between the stalls, along the toes;
Bevies of treacherous maidens young;
Beyond the city-barriers haste.Thou also, reader generous,
Beyond this may attempt to write_.Infallibly you there will find
Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
Blank, unapproachable and cold.
Blest be the labours of the light,
Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,
Books he abandoned like the fair,
"Boredom, my friend, behold the ill--"
Born of a babbler in a loft
Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,
Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
Both day and night he now must pass
Both ducks and geese in plenty bred
Both for the nails and for the tushes.
Both natural and truthful seemed.
Both were expectant of the hate
Both were of passion satiate
Boulevards, belfries, milliners,
Bouyanoff courted. She refused.
Bouyanoff too, my cousin, wore
Bouyanoff whisked off Poustiakova.
Bows and the scrape of many feet,
Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,
Bright blazed the window of the place,
Bright day will then begin to burn,
Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
"Bring dinner now without delay!"Upon the table in a trice
Bringing his partner corpulent
Britzka, kibitka, or in coach.
Bruin is marching at her back!She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
Bullets are down the barrels pressed,
Buried in meditation deep,
But Adam Smith to read appeared,
But Eugene long hath left the press
But Eugene was by fate preserved,
But Eugene, hating litigation
But Eugene, incontestably,
But Fortune cast our lots apart
But I abandoned their array,
But I am now another's bride--
But I await thee: scarce alive
But I came not to adulate:
But I must add to what I write
But I must now employ my Muse
But I perceive thou dost not heed--"
But I was sharp in times gone by.
But I, in love, was mute and dull.The Muse appeared, when love passed by
But I--what is all this to me?
But Lenski madrigals ne'er wrote
But Lenski, I should be so glad
But Lenski, having no desire
But Lord! from friends deliver me!
But Olga would not such peruse.
But Summer swiftly fades away
But Tania just as in a dream
But Tania's heart is not at ease,
But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead--
But as to fighting--'twill appear!
But at a later, sterile age,
But at her shriek ran forth with noise
But better loved the soft repose
But boldly I myself resign:
But borne in spirit far away
But by degrees the crowd begin
But by fantastic dreams distraught,
But cannot anyhow evade
But cannot stand the northern cold.
But competition I abjure
But contrary to her advice
But could not. Then she questioned him:--
"But death from him will be delight.
But deeming all this nonsense pure,
But dinner-time comes. Two and two
But enough! Now, 'tis my intent
But fashionable hatred's flame
But finally grew bored by her.
But finally he oped his eyes
But finally in wedlock bind.
But finally she softly said:
But first permission did request
But followed the strict rules of art,
But fools--their calumnies and sneers"--
But from the Muses' loftiest height
But gazes on Oneguine's face
But grant with magnanimity
But gray Phillippevna the door
But grown familiar side by side
But he desired not to beguile
But he who by the Muse was nursed
But home his body to despatch
But if my lot unfortunate
But if the truth I must relate,
But in his heart dissatisfied,
But in the drawing-room all appeared
But it grew late; cold blew the gale;
But it grew late; he must not stay;
But kindness from his eye had beamed
But lights incendiary flames
But little warmth the fireplace lends,
But lo! already the moon's light
But lo! his braggart neighbour hath
But lo! the friends to chat commence."How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
But lonely beneath Finnish skies
But look you--ah! do not refuse."
But man of sense and probity.He might his motives have narrated,
But memory like a serpent's tooth
But merely to exasperate;
But my Oneguine the whole eve
But my Tattiana's eyes were dry.
But my Tattiana, on my soul,
But no reply unto her made.
But nought for this Tattiana cares.The break of day she doth not see,
But now a question in this wise
But now all doubt was set aside,
But now in her effulgence pale
But now my mind is desolate,
But now our hero we must leave
But now ridiculous a bit.Behold Sabouroff, whom the age
But now--my very blood congeals,
But now--none heeds the monument
But now--what brings you to my feet?--
But nowhere can she find repose,
But of this love, e'en casually,
But on the third of grove and mead
But one buffoon unhappy deemed
But one thought only filled his mind,
But plainer girls they oft had seen.
But praised be God! in health art thou!
But presently she tried to read;
But promise of our meeting gave,
But proudly in his song preserved
But round the hostess scintillate
But say he was a genius who
But scarce had maids their saucers ta'en
But scarce had sleep's soft witchery
But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
But send your grandson before long."No answer all that day was borne.
But shall depict the touching scene
But since to the backdoor they led
But sits in bed with air depressed,
But somehow there shone in his look
But soon she altered all her ways,
But soon their choice seemed to her mind
But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
But stares into the darkness deep.
But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
But still more stupid did appear
But still remembrance to him clings,
But stop! I will present thee, if
"But strange am I to happiness;
But strength of mind and self-restraint
But such is not for me. I brood
But such is not my project now,
But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
But suddenly all changed around!
But sweeter in a midnight dream
But sweeter still it is to arrange
But tell me what am I to do?
"But tell me, nurse, can you relate
But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts
But that Princess Pauline of old,
But that the eyes of every one
But the dark sepulchre I may
But the date subsequently changed
But the indifferent princess,
But the young unpolluted heart
But they draw near. Before them, lo!
But this a heinous crime appeared
But this adventure's consequence
But this amusement delicate
But this is my advice, 'twere best
But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
But thoughts meander far away--
But time flies and she doth forget
But to Vladimir Eugene saith:
But to the garden once again
But trembles, words he cannot find,
But trembling on the mirror dark
But tremor still her frame possessed,
But trusted the ideal she wrought?--
But turn we once more to our dame.
But turning morning into night,
But ultimately doth approach.
But upon all that Eugene knew
But was our friend Eugene content,
But were it not immoral I
But what a nuisance it will be,
But what astonished do I find
But what results? His eyes peruse
But when Tattiana's hand had ta'en
But when the winter season came
But when two minutes she had sat,
But where Melpomene doth rave
But wherefore not?--'Tis pleasant, nice,
"But which, my dear?--In days of yore
But who abandon it--as I
But who in that choice company
But why are your cheeks whitening?"
But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
But wilful, frivolous, and light.
But will not modify a tittle--
But with austerity!--for you
But with confused and bashful air,
But with her elder sister I
But word for word his letter read.All is foreseen. My secret drear
But would not look at Cicero.
But wretched who anticipates,
But ye to whom, when friendship heard,
But ye, O happy husbands, ye
But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
But you must both be quite tired out!
But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
"But, _matushka_, to Moscow you
But, after mutual compliments,
But, as I said, Zaretski mine
But, as he never opened them,
But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
But, her own room in memory,
But, knowing not the actual truth,
But, that life longer may remain,
But, to his uncle's mansion flown,
But, when Oneguine's turn came round,
"But," cried Zaretski in amaze,
By "belle Tattiana" to replace.Lo! from the nearest barrack came,
By Faublas in his youth was schooled,
By Heaven in lieu of happiness.Habit alleviates the grief
By Olga stood, dejected quite
By Olga's hand distributed
By Providence's dark decree!
By Tania, smoothing his peruke,
By Tolstoy's pencil marvellous,
By a rich pie were occupied--
By absence who hath chilled his love,
By an _obrok's_ indulgent rate:
By an avowal just as plain.
By barren snow heaped up and bound,
By bee and butterfly which pass.'Twas she who first within his breast
By children and by faithful wife
By computation) it is like
By daily life deteriorated,
By dull insensibility,
By every proper-minded wife,
By flattery and lover's art--
By fond illusions once possest
By friendship how they were abused,
By his embarrassed dignity--
By indolence and languor fired
By liberties or loose or light.And yet the city's flower was there,
By love's inevitable flame.
By many a lamp illuminate,
By melancholy fogs concealed.
By neighbouring families bewept,
By night prepared for sorcery,
By other thoughts be occupied.But I the products of my Muse,
By poor Tattiana in the blues;
By rank as settled by the State.
By recklessness amuse or shame
By such allusions scandalous,
By sympathy I have been driven.
By the coarse wit of worldly hate;
By the decree of Mighty Jove,
By the fine silver of the north.
By the old lime-tree or the rill,
By their own horses, not the post--
By time
By visions who was ne'er deranged
By waters shining tranquilly,
By what idea or observation
By whom the youthful bard was slain?"--
Byron's capricious phantasy
Calling to mind your icy look
Callous to all he seemed to be.Ye miracles of courtly grace,
Callous to all on earth become--
Calm and without embarrassment,
Calmly her eyes encounter his--
Came forth in all her magic sheen.The snow descends and buries all,
Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,
Can count the time without much fuss--
Can hearty welcome give alone.
Can lower depths beyond remain?
Can scarce in sweetness be a match.Well, if your pistol ball by chance
Can she have been a moment gone
Can we not stealthily make out
Cannot they amicably smile
Canto the First of this romance.
Capers applauds with clap of hands,
Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fetes;
Careless of every social rule,
Careless of fame his spirit high
Caricatures he now designed
Carried a truth divine away;
Carried away by ecstasy,
Cartel, or challenge to a fight,
Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
Cast down his eyes in trepidation
Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim
Caught him and by the collar took
Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
Certain misfortune near opined.
Chained to his bedside night and day
Change of position had essayed,
Charming is your sincerity,
Charming with grave simplicity.He sang of love--to love a slave.
Charms more enduring in the end.
Chief rascal, pot-house president,
Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,
Choosing a profitable trade,
Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,--
Cocked hat and melancholy brow.
Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
Come sing we in chorus
_Come to my golden palace, dear_!
"Come," she cried, "sister, tell me e'en
Comfort and succour to the poor,
Command him not to say a word--
"Command me, darling, what you choose"--
Commence a new career in life
Companion of my childhood's days.
Compassion now or wrath inspires
Conceitedly on Tania fair,
Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
Condemned to exile dire by fate,
Conduct Tattiana constantly,
Confessions which a trusting heart
Confront thy fated torturer!Love's pangs Tattiana agonize.
Conquer by passion and address,
Conscious of death approximate,
Consisting of harmonious lays,
Constant affection intertwined
Contemplate her sad reverie.
Contend with knife and fork and platter,
Contented and with victuals stored,
Conventionality's dull tool--
Corneille's majestic genius,
Corset and album and Pauline,
Could in a humble sphere despise,
Could in romantic mantle drape
Could not conceive how serious Grimm
Could not eclipse her neighbour's light."And is it," meditates Eugene.
Could not in that brief moment guess!
Could taste the pleasures of the road.
Cousin, rememb'rest Grandison?"
Cried the old dame with anguish filled:
Cropped in the latest style his hair,
Crunching the morning snow she treads;
Crush and confusion in the hall,
Crushing and a confusing noise;
Cunning already to display
Cursing his own stupidity,
Curtly announcing for the fray
Custom the despot soon prevails.
Customs by ages sanctified,
Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
Daily of love in solitude.
Dally with a dishevelled tress
Danced the mazurka gracefully,
Dared calmly cleanse his nails 'fore him,
Dark clouds before the north wind fly;
Dark shadows thicken--a dread cry
Dark was the valley and the wood
Dark, unavailing reverie,
Debate commanded ample food--
Deeming himself a veteran scarred
Deep in our mother Earth's chill breast!"Tattiana's eyes with tender gleam
Deep in the distant province rude,
Deep in the greenwood far away?Arising with the morning's light,
Deep into debt his father ran;
Deliberate approach of guests
Delicious nature, thee I fly,
Delicious visions, jests and fights!Alas! my stomach it betrays
Delighted glances in return;
Delighted much his former ways
Delighted, almost sane in mind.But once more pensive and distressed
"Delighted."--"When?"--"This very night.
Delusions of a mind untried,
Demands that I translate for you
_Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
Depart in peace and friendly live?
Departed, ordered out his horse
Depicted on your haughty face!
Deplores a most unworthy spouse
Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
Descended swift in turbid streams
Descends the bank with care extreme,
Descends, the order Guillot gives,
Describe in detail the affair,
Descried before me suddenly!
Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,
Desire to rule ye may observe
Desirous to annihilate
Despair and anger seize on me,
Despite the anguish of his breast,
Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
Detecting him the passing horse
Detest him for a brother slain?
Develops and matures its powers,
Device of rural minds acute!)Young maidens, fair maidens,
Devoured them with an eager zest.
Did not their lips with foreign speech
Did seem to greet the youthful year;
Did they not all the Russian tongue
Dies suddenly: of heirs alone
Diminishes as years decline.
Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
Discovered much absurdity,
Disperse yourselves, darlings,
Displayed a noble rectitude--
Disport yourselves, maidens,
Distinctly not its mechanism.
Distracted by her grief appears
Divinity without access
                    Dmitrieff
Do agitate his late repose.
Do all things which to mirth incline.
Do me a favour and appear.
Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
Do not excuse yourself. I read
"Do not--you might--suspicious be;
Do we alone our losses mourn
Do we foresee in troubled dreams
Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
Doctors and women, sobs and groans.But, howsoe'er his lot were cast,
Domestic life attracts me still,
Doth his brow wretchedness declare
Doth in her gentle eye appear.
Doth in us or our names appear,
Doth love's incautiousness in her
Doth on the billiard table rest,
Doth seem to him the festal scene.
Doubt and uncertainty decide:
Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
Drank to her health in the first place,
Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go--
Dreading the world's remarks malign,
Dreamed in the future man and wife.
Dreaming herself the heroine
Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
Dreaming perchance in weal or woe
Dreams with no continuity,
Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
Dressed like a London dandy he
Dressing as quickly as he can,
Drive on! the city barriers hoary
"Drive on!" the cheerful cry goes forth,
Drive out the cattle from their shed,
Driving abreast three horses gray.
Drunk as a fly; and thus the French
_E sempre bene_, gentlemen!
E'en as the poet says he leant.
E'en as the presence of a snake,
E'en for an instant find delight,
E'en from her cradle's earliest dream,
E'en hopeless egoism's dark shape.
Each gave Tattiana's arm a nudge
Each gust of temper, silly word,
Each other as the shore we climb!
Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:
Economy political,
Eight times the heroes of the fight
Either she saw not or ignored;
Either with him or thee in song,
Eloquent raver all-surpassing,--
Employ your glasses constantly,
Enamoured at her feet to fall.
Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,
Enchanted by the moon's pale beam.
Enchanting, but unwittingly,
Enclosing pictures of fair dames.
Encountered punishment complete,
Endless conjectures all propound
Endowing us from out her store
Engrave the ice with strident noise.
Enhances love in estimation
Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows--
Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
Ennui can in the country dwell
"Enough to see one winter's end;
Enough! my pack is now unslung--
Enough! with tranquil spirit I
"Enough, arise! for much we need
Enough, enough, conclude thy lay--
Enraptured was he if allowed
Entranced me by some mystic tale.
Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess
Entrusted all to her sincerely,
Epicurean philosophers,
Epistle second, note the third,
Epistles of six sheets or near,
Ere conversation could begin,
Ere crimson stains their hands defile,
Ere the bright messenger had set.
Ere this but one brief moment beat
Espy him approaching,
Espying, Eugene with a smile
Esteemed him much as the world goes.
Et cetera_; but nothing showed
Eternally to imitate
Eugene at first began to dream,
Eugene designed with me to start
Eugene directs the trusty man
Eugene fell prostrate at her feet--
Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
Eugene of course related nought,
Eugene was touched with sympathy;
Eugene would speak regarding these.
Eugene, more tolerant than this
Euphonious, though I know a spice
Even amusing fools we miss
Even as Moscow, city proud.Confess, O ye who this peruse,
Even as the love of children dear.
Even beneath her parents' roof
Even the rosy wafer dries
Eventually petrify
Ever absorbed a maid so much:
Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
Ever receive with kindly hearts
Ever to hear the same replies
Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
Examine her from head to foot.
Examined, mended, newly found
Except one by the window placed
Exceptionless as no rule is,
Exclaiming, "We must change 'em all!
Excruciate the heart and late
Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
Exist--that their immortal band
Existence calmly sped along,
Existence without wife or friends,
Existence would not make a curse,
Extended--haunt which Dryads love.
Extinct the flame which once had fired;
Extinguished ashes do not blaze--
Faces which we meet everywhere
Fair object of my guileless lay,
Fair source of every fine idea,
Faithfully shall I now depict,
Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,
False confidence or doubt to impart,
Familiar to him long ago.
Fantastic images shall swarm
Far from his Italy--his own.
Far from the rest the pair would creep
'Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Farewell! thou golden days of love!
Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
Fashion is there immutable,
Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;
Fearing his pupil to annoy,
Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,
Feeling in others much esteemed.With smiling face he Lenski hears;
Feeling is silly, dangerous.
Feelings which long had ceased to be
Felled a calumniator base!
Finally tost his arms in air
First reconciled and then content;
Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
Flew to collect his rural tax;
Flies past the porter to the stair,
Fly frequent to my solitude,
Foeman or friend, I do aspire
Follow up love--a secret meeting
Fond declarations they invite
For Ay is like a mistress fair,
For God's sake, Lenski, don't begin!
For I myself was thirteen quite;
For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,
For Moscow fops and Circes each
For a fictitious misanthrope,
For a protracted space of time.
For baseness of the spirit scorns,
For consecrate to me he fell
For dolls, e'en from her earliest years,
For empty sound the rascal swore he
For ever carps, condemns, pursues?
For ever faithful will abide."
For ever with thy tattling lyre,
For ever your Tattiana leave.
For evermore had disappeared.
For evermore is separate.
For every loyal Russian breast!
For first "madame" his wants observed,
For folly's dues thou hadst to pay.Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,
For him an honourable grave,
For him were but of little worth,
For journalistic deglutition
For law I _far niente_ take
For long he had endured them all.
For long--for ever. To be sure
For maiden's hearing deemed unfit),
For my wild garden and bookcase,--
For o'er a word to fashion known,
For on their brows I trembling read
For otherwise--God only knows!
For our Automedons are fire
For our amusement ever made
For patience, reader, I must plead!
For promises her feet reveal
For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,
For rural solitude and dreams,
For savage speech, uncouth and strange,
For shame lift up the modest maid.
For summer to the country flown,
For tallow, wood and other things
For the first time the hammer clicks.
For the impatient chief instead.
For the young poet they display.
For there he left a mournful trace.
For treachery had done its worst;
For twice you came to them and yet
For us, may be for many a year.
For visions of my childish years
For was it not her duty to
For which no springtime shall appear?
For which the poet agonized
For who imposture can endure,
For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?I have known beauties cold and raw
For your instruction here to tell
For, from the outset, 'twas unjust
Forgive me! Such the love I bear
Forgive the fever youth inspires,
Forgot the world, the noisy ball,
Forgotten in the village lone,
Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,
Fortune the poet had repaid.
Found out the secret how at pleasure
Found the ideal of my youth,
Found them in darkness side by side,
Four deadly paces do they span;
Fragments of northern poetry,
Free scope he yields unto his glance,
Free, I renewed the idolatry
Free, in the blossom of his spring,
Frequent and rapid doth his glance
Fresh cause of quarrel then I'll find,
Friends and companions,
Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,
Friends of the sons of every land,
Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
From Gottingen inspired he came,
From Romulus unto our day.
From apprehension of the cost,
From boxes or from stalls in rows.To the assembly her they bear.
From careless stanzas such as these,
From everything the heart held dear
From first to last page to the rim.
From gales a hill behind was seen;
From habit or maliciously,
From hall to yard and garden flies,
From happy inspiration flow,
From hence engrossed in thought profound
From henceforth I confide to thee!
From her half-open vest of night.
From her my lips shall learn the tongue
From mere vacuity of mind
From public and from private ties,
From shades of the relentless past.
From storms protection having sought,
From such digressions wholly free.
From the dread pistol turn away.
From the moist cork the bottle freed
From whose analysis minute
From you too Eugene took to flight,
Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
Full many a glance like lightning flash,
Full of exasperating thought.
Funeral amateurs abound!
Furious he from the table rose;
Gallop, mazurka, waltzing--see!
Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.
Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!
Gazing into his face, she said:
Gazing on Lenski's corse did stand--
Gazing upon a note below.
Gently for pranks he would reprove
Gifts such as these alone could prize,
Girls in anticipation skip!
Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.
Give me just half a glass of wine--
Glides with a more luxurious ease;
Gliding in negligent career,
Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
Glittered in a perspective long,
Glory with which our history teems
Go hear the rustling of the oaks
Go, on the Neva's bank appear,
God grant I meet not at a ball
God grant that all who herein glance,
God knows! The very trace is lost.'Tis sweet the foe to aggravate
God save his soul eternally
Goddess of lovers' tender sighs.
Good governs all! The hour draws nigh
"Good-bye, Oneguine, I must go."--
Good-night." Behold! she is alone!
Grant that I err not on the road."
Grasped a long knife and instantly
Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
Gravely repeating to another
Great sacrifices for his sake!
Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath
Grew like a lily pure and white,
    Griboyedoff
Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,
Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
Guards fondly hope's uncertain dream.
Guillot behind a pollard stood;
Gvozdine, Bouyanoff, Petoushkoff
Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,
Habit was given us in distress
Habit would bring indifference.
Had a deluded victim been
Had bid her sigh for without hope--
Had come both friends and enemies--
Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
Had finished life amid his sons,
"Had he been long here, and where from?
Had killed me had the like been told."
Had let fall many a bitter tear:
Had much to do at home that day,
Had not yet withered his young breast.
Had perished a creative mind,
Had reconciled the pair anew!
Had rendered him an invalid;
Had run across her path at speed,
Had to compose in secret rhymes,
Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
Handbook of fashionable phrase
Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,
Happy and glorious_. But this brings
Happy who quit life's banquet seat
Happy who thereto can unite
Happy who timely grew mature,
Hard by the window took her place."--
Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:
Harvests of souls unceasingly
Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!
Hateful the hollow world became,
Hath fate apportioned unto thee
Hath gradually learnt to endure;
Hath mixed himself in the affair,
Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
Hath she a fitting phrase selected?
Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
Hath the bard, by indifference blest,
Hath tranquilly in turn attained,
Hath whiled the road's monotony,
Haughty appear, subservient,
Have e'er a precious tress consigned,
Have echoed to eternity.
Have entered never to return.
Have felt love's agitated kiss
Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!
Have latterly vexatious grown;
Have my Oneguine--suddenly.
Have one by one all withered grown
Have shone as one of fashion's leaders.
Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
Having a trusty staff bestowed,
Having for money's sake alone
Having lost all in life we prize.
Having once fixed your interest,
Having performed his service truly,
Having remarked Vladimir's flight,
Having this mournful document
He "Benedetta" used to hum,
He _cannot_ give me happiness."
He a polite reply doth scrawl.
He back as from a sudden blow?--
He bending whispered in her ear
He bends his course to Talon's, where
He bowed to her nor silence broke,
He brought from mystic Germany
He called to mind Tattiana's grace,
He called upon me Christmas Eve--
He cared no longer there to stay,
He conversation would have led--
He could in disputation shine
He daily in his drives drew near
He deemed his coming would inspire
He deemed his friends but longed to make
He deemed of human life the goal
He dragged her by a forest road
He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
He drops his pistol silently.He on his bosom gently placed
He enters the saloon. 'Tis blank!
He enters. Ah! good news to-day!
He enters. High the cork arose
He enters: in the hall a crowd,
He enters: rapidly discussion
He enters: to the mill he drives:
He eyed her with a fond concern,
He feared the criminal might try
He felt the laudable desire
He finally lost all delight
He fixedly upon her stares--
He found him on the table laid,
He found them in an almanac,
He from his Kalmuck horse did leap
He gazed upon the clock which showed
He had excepted from the ban:
He has returned, say in what guise?
He hath acquired the world's esteem
"He hath neglected us of late."--
He heard his soul's complaint within,
He hies unto the "Boulevard,"
He in imagination saw
He in the early years of life
He is a charming youth and wise.
He is not there: I am not known:
He kindled his poetic flame.
He knew not how to spend his life.
He knits his brows--'tis silent all.
He knows Kaverine will repair.
He laughs, although it aches from cold,
He left _you_ first, and I must own
He leisurely adorns for her.
He lies, upon his forehead death,
He long should have been on the road.He rings in haste; in haste arrives
He loved the simpleton to mock,
He marmot-like did hibernate,
He mused: "I will her saviour be!
He ne'er shall hear Time's eulogy,
He nears a spacious mansion's gate,
He now a full possession takes,
He obstinately will remain,
He offers her his murderous paw;
He oft upon his lips would curb,
He on the conflagration frowned.
He ought to have conciliated
He perished. Where his troubled dreams,
"He promised here this day to ride,"
He racked his brains to find its clue
He read the unbelieving Bayle,
He reads at random, reads in vain.
He roars, and "Ah!" Tattiana cries.
He round the billiard-table stalked,
He salutary rules poured forth?
He sang of life's fresh colours stained
He sang of separation grim,
He sat, and then the livelong day,
He seemed for matrimony born.He was beloved: or say at least,
He shunned those parties boisterous;
He smiles, in laughter all combine;
He somewhat blushing would omit:
He still made love in a queer way;
He takes his seat, concludes his game,
He there is master--that is plain;
He thought so, and existence charmed.
He thought to write, but labour long
He to the festival repairs,
He took no more the slightest heed;
He took the room wherein the old
He used to hate--and was no fool--
He usually was glad to see
He wakes--they with a letter come--
He wanders in his indolence;
He was a dangerous fool indeed.
He was a dear delightful fool--
He was an honest gentleman,
He was deceived. Just as before
He was in error; for Eugene
He was no fool, and Eugene mine,
He was no more! The youthful bard
He well-nigh lost the use of sense,
He who economy abhorred,
He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
He who life's frosts which early wrung
He whom we sing to shall be made
He will delight you, I am sure,
He with an innocence extreme
He with his little maiden played,
He witnessed tenderly and moved
He would not that a man ye slay
He writes upon his parents' tomb,
He wrote ('tis the romantic style,
He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
He yawns, averts his countenance,
He's a freemason, so we think.
He's a straightforward little chap."
"He's here! Eugene is here!
Heard he the truth? And thus she could--
Hearing the fatal perfidy?
Hears not my importunity!
Heart would not throb albeit in jest--
Heaved an involuntary sigh
Heavy his heart with anguish grew;
Heedless of your despairing cry?Eugene, his pistol yet in hand
Her Grandison was in the Guard,
Her Martin Zadeka in aid,
Her Moscow cousin, often told
Her agitation and distress
Her all in all did constitute;
Her amorous experience
Her antiquated mode of speech,
Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
Her bow was easy, unreserved.Ah no! no faintness her attacked
Her brow she did not e'en contract
Her cap of tulle still ever wears:
Her caps and night-dresses to mend.As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
Her cheek of rosy loveliness
Her cheek reclines upon her hand.Oh! who her speechless agonies
Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
Her eyes no saucy glance address,
Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
Her features no grimaces bleared;
Her feet the earth beneath her press!
Her figure perfect grows with time!
Her foot was in my other hand.
Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,
Her garden, and those books of hers,
Her girlish gaiety and sport.
Her glance how wild yet genial!
Her hand for the cotillon prays.
Her handkerchief she loses now;
Her head upon her breast declines
Her health, life's sweetness and its bloom,
Her heart how full of gentleness,
Her heart importunately turns.
Her heart more loudly and more fleet.She hesitates, in doubt is thrown--
Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit
Her house he enters, ghastly white,
Her husband was a bridegroom then,
Her in the pitfalls which we place.
Her inmost soul had penetrated,
Her lips where light smiles come and go!
Her locks were of a golden hue,
Her manners were deliberate,
Her money counted, and designed
Her movements, voice and figure slight,
Her nurse, who could have made a guess,
Her on a shaky bench sit down;
Her passion's faithful counterpart,
Her path across the plain doth keep--
Her promptings unto law did make,
Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,
Her sentimental verses all,
Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
Her shoulder--Olga swiftly came--
Her shoulders, breast and face to lave--
Her sisterhood delights the young
Her smile and maidenly repose,
Her spacious fields and shady groves,
Her steppe-like beauties I peruse
Her suit before my parents pressing:
Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
Her tears flow plentifully and
Her the ideal which he dreamed,
Her toilette's antiquated style,
Her tresses curled in fashion saw,
Her utterances ever heard,
Her weary eyes are filled with tears--
Her with a smile old women greet,
Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;
Herds low, and under night's dark veil
Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
Here bottles stand in close array,
Here, drunk with his late victory,
"Here, he resides with Simeon.
Herein my portrait should detect,
Herself not knowing well the reason,
Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
Hid in the gondola's dark shade,
Highways all Russia will unite
Him a disquietude did seize,
Him who inspired both love and awe,
Himself just like a greenhorn fell.
Himself transformed into a hack;
His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,
His Hellespont from bank to bank,
His ardent soul with full delight.
His arm he offers. Mute and sad,
His bit with foam besprinkled o'er,
His book-shelf instantly doth drape
His breast was riddled through and through,
His butting horns in anger bent,
His care unto his pistols' plight,
His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;
His chambers close wherein confined
His character attracted me.
His comedies, a noisy rout,
His constant soul could ever tire,
His course unto the running brook.
His cup unto his maiden dear.
His daily occupations, lo!
His daughter's book to ascertain
His ditties were as pure and bright
His double sashes and his grate,
His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
His energy and impotence.And numerous pages had preserved
His entrance with Oneguine. "Ah!
His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,
His fate shall presently decide.
His fist Oneguine fiercely shook
His footing on the treacherous rime
His friends and also enemies
His friendship I acquired just then;
His furs are powdered on the way
His gusts should fertilize, amend,
His hand, and fell. His clouded eye
His harp beneath that sky had rung
His hate by slander, and who spends
His head sinks slowly, rests upon
His heart reciprocated still
His housekeeper was wont to scold,
His immorality of mind
His inner consciousness laid bare,
His intellect in close array.
His kneeling posture he retains--
His lyre, to silence now consigned,
His momentary loving glance
His mother from the door doth scold.
His mournful heart no peace could find,
His name: the tenderness of home
His neighbour's lowly tomb and mourned
His own antagonists expert,
His pony sniffing the fresh snows
His recent glory he invokes.
His relative and friend as well.
His ruffian bravery adored,
His shop, a night-cap on his head,
His son and mortgages his lands.
His son is married, just conceive!""And he--but of him presently--
His song, when still he slumbered deep,
His soul by crash of music fired,
His spirit sank with strange delight.
His spirit was intent upon.
His sunken eye and aspect faint,
His tea with rum no more desired,
His transports were quite maidenly,
His travels like all other things
His uncle, busy man indeed,
His valet brings him letters three.
His vanity first let us pique
His visit she had not awaited,
His wadded coat and cap with peak;
His watch, the sun in turn he views--
His weary head declined at rest,
His wife approaches, with him leads
His wife was also mad upon
Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,
Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
Honour and pride inflexible.
Hope to conceal and jealousy,
Hope with her fascinating power
Hopeless are all the first, I own,
Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment
Horror of sinfulness and shame,
Horror! had she not better stay
How I have erred and felt the rod!
"How Tania grows! Doth it appear
How artless was the note which spoke
How bitterly he would malign,
How bright and tender was his look,
"How came you then to wed a man?"--
How charming Olga's shoulders grow!
How dark the night is getting though!
How deftly could he transport feign!
How empires store of wealth unfold,
How flourish, why and wherefore less
How full of fire his speech would glow!
How like a poet was my chum
How like the billow I desired
How mean, how pusillanimous!
How meekly then I heard you preach--
How much is in that word expressed!
"How now, Oneguine, yawning still?"--
How oft beneath the moonbeams pale
How oft the kindly Muse away
How oft to the Crimean shore
"How often in thine arms I lay;
How perfect doth our epoch grow!
How pleasantly the evening jogs
How sick to death his uncle lay
How soon he learnt deception's art,
How soon to habits she conformed
How sweet a dream your memories raise!
How the young imp on Tania doted!
How thoroughly her part she took!
How thy hands burn!"--"Dear nurse, I'm well.
How with thy medal I would play,
How! from the waste of steppes unseen,"--
However cherries might abound,
However, Tania's letter reading,
However, the mazurka lacks
Howl like a dolt: 'tis meant for me!
Hung like a print against the wall,
Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn
Hurrah! it long ago was time!
Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers
Hymen's embarrassments, distress,
I Apuleius gladly read
I also wandered there of old,
I am acquainted with fresh care,
I am in love, my hour hath come!
"I am in love, nurse! leave me now."
I am not strong enough to state;
I am not worthy them in aught;
I am--in love--you know--don't tell!"
I ask, all ye who poets are,
I blame not your behaviour--
I by the button-hole seize fast
"I call to witness God on high--"
I can't conceive a little dear
I can't translate the adjective.
I cannot help it I declare,
I cannot longer wage concealed.
I cannot tell on what pretence--
I cannot tell the reason why,
I cannot understand. But lo!
"I celebrate a comrade young
I did not please you. Why pursue
I envied sore the billows tall,
I feel thou wast by God sent down
I feel, allotted is my span;
I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
I formerly admired her much
I guard it as a holy thing,
I had found my predestinate,
I have dreamed many a vision fair
I have endured without respite.
I have it. Lo! the very thing!
I have no leisure here to dwell,
I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.
I heard thy voice's resonance
I just hint, in parenthesis,
I know not if his heart felt pain
I know that Parny's tender pen
I know there's none more amiable.But from the interview what flowed?
I lift a warning voice because
I like the difference to express
I long by ballets have been bored,
I long enough deceived have erred.
I long have ceased to offend the laws.Alas! life's hours which swiftly fly
I love its furious delight,
I love them, O my dear Elvine,
I love you with a brother's love,
I love you--to what end deceive?--
I loved you--what did I obtain?
I married--now, I supplicate--
I mean my name not to repeat."
I might to connoisseurs repeat
I mourn, but tears I cannot shed--
I murmur not! Why mournfulness?
I mused: perhaps the matter's squared--
I must resign myself, in sooth;
I never should have seen your face
I on my chosen hero dote;
I once forgot for your sweet cause
I owe the censorship a little.
I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
I promised!--Did I so?--Well, there!
I sail upon my lake at times
I say without poetic phrase,
I see you weep. Those tears of yours
"I shall expire," Tattiana cried,
I should alarm our friendship tried:
I slumber much, a little read,
I thank thee for thy joyfulness,
I thank thee. In thy company,
I the same admonition make.
I then resolved my heart to tear;
I thought--retirement, liberty,
I tremble lest my humble prayer
I uttered to my lady fair
I was half silly with affright.
I was incensed and he was sad.
"I weep. And if within your breast
I will descant on love's sweet dream,
I will not wed, and ever weeps
"I with my friend intend to fight!"If he had only known the wound
"I won't detain you; but 'tis hard
I would desire my bride to be--
I would not part with finally;
I would your vigilance arouse,
I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
I write, and anguish flies away,
I yield for splendid vanities,
I yield the fruit of work severe.
I yield with a low reverence;
I'll pass beneath the firmament,
I'll sprinkle thee with holy water.--
I'm beaten in another matter;
"I'm happy, say, is it not so?"--
I'm not for witchcraft now inclined.
I'm o'er it ever pondering.
I've had to make for having friends!But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
I've scanned it with a jealous eye,
I've wasted in amusements vain,
I, after so much eloquence,
"Ideal," he had drowsy grown.
Ideas, desires and woes confuse
Idolatry of liberty,
If Olga smilingly approve,
If but to lighten Time's dull rate,
If cleverly or not I prate.But, O ye tomes without compare,
If his hot hand encountered hers,
If in the scenes of home I might
If not, the money I will lend."
If seriously he hath disease;
If the choice in my power were,
"If the domestic hearth could bless--
If the fond hope I could have fanned
If the poor maiden could have guessed
If the raw product they possess
If they but heard domestic loads
If they were similar in aught.
If thou wert sitting by my side,
If wife and children to possess
If ye but knew how dreadful 'tis
Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?
Imagination's sacred fires,
Imagine! Here alone am I!
Immersed in melancholy thought,
Immersed in secret thought I stand
Impatient waits the close of day,
Impatient, boiling o'er with wrath,
Impatiently the gallery stamps,
Impelled by Spring's dissolving beams,
Impelled by zeal for moral worth,
Impelled to union with his own
Imperial portraits hang around
Impetuously clove its way
Imploring looks and mute complaint
Impressed him in the least degree,--
Impressionable for an hour,
Imprudent prattle of the heart,
In Olga's album, youthful maid,
In Olga's and Tattiana's rooms
In Olga's face no life's displayed.
In Russ her love made manifest,
In Tania's praise in pouch he brought,
In a half-open dressing-gown
In a lax or informal way,
In age the memory gets worse,
In aimless ease and far from strife,
In amorous flights when so inspired,
In books he saw nought to condemn
In boston and the game of age,
In bud of promise incomplete,
In bullets, sabres, and in fight.His malady, whose cause I ween
In charming fashion mutilate?
In clouds of steam above perceive.
In coach or post-cart duly placed
In column blue the smoke doth rise;
In company, or simply bowed,
In consultation stand aside--
In correspondence been allowed.
In country solitude you mope,
In country towns, where still it keeps
In course of time (the whole extent
In dreams and what the moon foretold
In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:
In duel having killed his friend
In fact, some people were assured
In former years thus did not I
In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!He was most gay. The happy date
In haunts of fashion where each day
In her affairs ne'er interfered,
In her friends' albums, time had been,
In history he took no pleasure,
In hopes of everlasting fame
In horror for itself alone,
In idleness and tranquil joy
In jersey and in nightcap lay.
In life domestic see a string
In little maidens of thirteen?
In love adventures she was versed,
In love's campaigns Oneguine heard
In love, although its tempests vex,
In love-lorn meditation sad.
In many things had changed his life--
In melancholy loveliness,
In mist profound all yet is hid.
In monsters and fair dames was rich;
In mother Winter's strange caprice.
In motley and amusing chase.
In much his conduct stigmatized;
In mud and mire to wallow deep,
In old age life is weariness!"
In one great shout: she's mine! she's mine!"Mine!" cried Eugene with savage tone.
In one he doth accounts behold,
In one of thine enchanting lays
In one thing really did excel.
In order due the maidens pull;
In pages of a love narration
In poor Moldavia cast her lot,
In rhyming I show laziness.
In scarlet cap revolving glides.
In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
In scenes like these it may be though,
In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
In serious mood or dalliance
In silence shall I sit and yawn
In snow she sinks up to the knee;
In solid, unpretentious style,
In solitude or worldly din,
In some a willing martyrdom.
In spectacles and chestnut wig.
In spite of common sense we're wont
In spring-time, heard the cygnet's note
In springtime on the meadows green,
In such an album with delight
In that morass where you and I
In the French language perfectly,
In the Lyceum's noiseless shade
In the beginning of this lay,
In the beginning, cold and mute,
In the broad meadow a gay rout,
In the dawn of existence drear.
In the first place, say, am I right?
In the lone garden and the lane?
In the meantime her spirit sinks,
In the meantime the mill inspects.
In the recesses what hath stirred
In the unfettered hours of leisure
In the unmoved, magnificent
In the world's mortal revelries,
In the world's vortex my success,
In thee, thou world of empty bliss.In groups, official striplings glance
In their sterility of prattle,
In this case quite mistaken was.
In three weeks would arrive for them;
In thy imagination warm,
In time I'll give ye without fail
In times gone by thy bare command--"
In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.
In true interpretation hates:
In truth he had the happy trick
In vain my anxious eyes appeal;
In vain was youth by us received,
In vehicles surcharged with freight;
In what he merely acquiesced.
In whispers low the neighbours said:
In winter by its blank and dim
In winter on the fender bright,
In winter time would often come.
In winter, when Night longer holds
In worldly din or solitude
In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
In your young days and also mine),
Incessantly his chains to break."I still a complication view,
Incited by his stormy Muse
Incorrigible rogue, doth go.
Indeed, by force of magnetism
    Indifferent and sedate,
Indifferent he became to all,
Indifferent was her future fate.
Indites an inconsiderate scroll
Inflict annoyance and distress
"Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know
Inhabited the country, clad
Inheritor of all his race.
Inns there are none. Pretentious but
Insensible her hand remains
Inseparable from our lot;
Inseparable soon they be.
Inseparable they remained.
Inside clink glasses, cries resound
Inspired but weariness intense;
Inspired by whom this tenderness,
Inspired him with disgust and so
Instructed jestingly the boy,
Interrogation to denote.And my Tattiana now began
Into accounts would sometimes look,
Into delicious bondage gave
Into the chamber where he slept
Into the cups already sped
Into the district then to boot
Into the lonely house she went,
Into the starry night extend.
Into the study of the boy
Into the tangled garden goes
Into thy hands my fate I yield!No answer! He another sent.
Intoned it, manuscript in hand.
Introduce verse in conversation.
Invigorate imagination
Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,
Is ever ready to proclaim
Is ever ready with relief,
Is ever thus. With frowning brow
Is full of frigid jealousy,
"Is he known to you?"--"Yes and No."Wherefore regarding him express
"Is he the same or grown more wise?
Is it a dream, and can it be?
Is it for long?"--"Ma chere cousine!"
Is it not true? the objects fair,
Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
Is it that I am now compelled
Is it that ardent souls of flame
Is it that human restlessness
Is no more cherished amongst men.
Is occupied with Olga fair,
Is once again made manifest.
Is petted by the Emperor?--
Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
Is still condemned in love to be;
Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.No one the contrary will urge,
Is the world to him sealed and dumb?
Is waning. Yonder valley deep
Istomina the nimbly-bounding;
It blew: it howled: till winter e'en
It carries of antiquity
It gradually possessed his mind;
It matters not. Hope e'en to these
It may be that I did proceed--
It may be that his martyred shade
It may be ye were born, or there
It may be, I yield nutriment!
It now to investigate is time,
It occupied him from a boy,
It wakens in my breast again.
It was a cheery, generous
It whiled his idle hours away
It will be by a mob beset
Its cold unfeeling sentences;
Its driver seated on the rim
Its ebullition foaming white
Its insignificance I know
Its name, my friends, was Martin Zadeka,
Its passions and its modes of thought.The butt of scandal having been,
Its splendour and its blandishments,
Its stamping, capers and high leaps.
Its waters to the neighbouring vale.
Ivan Petrovitch still a gaby,
Jackdaws on every spire--in scores.
Jaws are at work. On every side
Jealousy and vexation took
Jilted--glad of a holiday.
Journeys and warriors to wed.
Judge then what roses would be ours,
Just as he entered. How severe!
Just at a moment which I grieve
Just at that time his father died,
Just at the hour we designate
Just at this moment I cannot.
Just before dinner-time he slept,
Just manages a feeble trot
Just placed the entrance door ajar.
Just so! that modest swain is blest
Keep your accounts! You'd rather not?
Kept lingering on as loath to go,
Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,
Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,
Killed! at this dreadful exclamation
Knew not an iamb from a choree,
Know that thy face that day I see.
Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,
Known unto children perfectly:
_Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
Ladies in crowds around her close,
Laid down his life of sun and storm
Lament, embrace upon that grave.
Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,
Landscapes thereon he would design,
Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
Late in the afternoon to rise,
Latest arrivals' salutations,
Latin is just now not in vogue,
Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,
Lay languishing both day and night--
Lead into good society,
Leaning against the dam expects,
Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
Learn to possess more self-control.
Leisurely through the gateway glides.
Lenski as a good match received,--
Lenski at intervals would dare,
Lenski his comrade did invite.
Lenski his pencil-case took out
Lenski replied, and soon they be
Lenski the foeman's apparition
Lenski the stroke could not sustain,
Lenski unto the dame replied,
Lenski, into confusion thrown,
Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,
Lessons to give he understood!How soon he learnt to titillate
Lest jaded with satiety,
Lest the malicious reader or
Lest the world or her lord divine
Let me explain that in my song
Let me present ye to the man,
Let not the poet's spirit freeze,
Let us go seek a little rest--
Let us proceed unto a rill,
Life lies extended, vast and bright,
Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.
Light sallies without coxcombry,
Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
Like D when dinner doth inspire.Destiny hath preserved his lay.
Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
Like Horace, planted cabbages,
Like Leonora did she ride
Like Venus when, capriciously,
Like a Bacchante in her sport
Like a full moon magnificent.
Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought
Like down from Aeolus's lip,
Like him renouncing vanity,
Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown--
Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;
Like you and me and all the rest?--
Likewise an epitaph with tears
List! the snow crunches--he draws nigh!
Listen to me without disdain.
Listless is she the livelong day
Lived as a really wise man ought,
Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,
Lo! in my garden was she found
Lo! my Oneguine free as air,
Lo! my Oneguine rural lord!
Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,
Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
Lo! through the frozen windows play
Lo! with what pride celestial
Lo, the ambassador who speaks
Lofty the chambers one and all,
Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
Long ago?"--"'Tis the second year."
Long ceased to be a reading man,
Long in this fashionable cell
Long listen, comprehend the whole
Long since I held thee at the font--
Long time her young imagination
Long time in meditation deep
Long tortured by his lay divine,
Long, long the hour had past when home
Longer the East inert reclines
Longtime her mind is occupied.
Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;
Longtime was her heart desolate
"Look quickly to your left, my sweet!"
Look through the window and kill flies.
Looks upon all with absent gaze
Looms gray behind the mist and morn
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall
Lost in the hamlet far away.And in addition youth is flame
Loud paws the earth each panting horse,
Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff
Love to idealize inclined;
Love to inspire doth woe appear
Love's tender transports and distress,
Luceria Lvovna paint applies,
Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:
Made me so tipsy long ago!
Made revelations undesigned,
Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
Maid whom my heart desires alone,
Maidens before her meekly move
Maids in the corner whisper low;
Make up your mind to go there."--"Ah!
Malek Adel and De Linar,
Malicious and a slanderer.
Malignant fury they disclose,
Man--forty years long in this wise--
Many an ancient legend which
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,
Mark ye with what a modest air
Marmontel also, tome the third;
Matrons unto the fireplace go,
May be that I by heaven's decrees
May be the empire of the sense,
May be, and this my terror wakes,
May find a crumb to satisfy.
May well in innocence impart.
May yet be studious of his nails;
Me now, inflict upon me pain?--
Me your perfections would not bless;
Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
Meagre, within a draughty hut,
Meals, secrets, occupations shared?
Meantime I'll finish whilst I can
Meantime Oneguine's apparition
Meantime a Cyclops of those parts
Meantime in matutinal dress
Measured with great exactitude.
Meet punishment for him provide.
Meeting you in times past by chance,
Men become friends from idleness.But even thus not now-a-days!
Men love no more, as only the
Men opposite. The cross they sign
Men will forget me, but my urn
Mends with the Russian hammer's blows
Merciful God, what will he deem?"
Method was dear unto his heart
Metreless verses recognizing
'Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,
Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
Minutely I will now portray.
Miraculously fair arise,
Misunderstanding, words and blows.
Modest yet daring! And a tear
Moina recalls for this alone
Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
"Monsieur l'Abbe" a starving Gaul,
Morality taught scarce at all;
More advantageously appear
More blooming than the Boreal flame
More clearly, God be praised, the man,
More crimson every moment they.
More satisfaction to her taste.
More swift the room Tattiana fled,
More timid than a doe long chased,
More troublesome than usual?"--"No!
Morning awakes with joyous sound;
Morning's forerunners, breezes blow
Mortally sick I am indeed.
Moscow
Moscow approach on bended knees,
Moscow! How much is in the phrase
Moscow's young Graces at her stare,
Moscow, Russia's darling daughter,
Moscow, how oft in evil days,
Most by this circumstance offended
Most carefully Zaretski placed
Most usually a Cossack horse
Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.
Mountains we'll level and through deep
Mournful Love's deadly trace appears
Mournful is thine approach to me,
Mushrooms for winter salted down,
Must be pronounced unfortunate--
Must bow in common courtesy;
Must e'en despise his kind at last;
Must now my stanzas occupy.Tattiana was her appellation.
Must take a walk and rest a bit--
Must visit them. Come! you must own,
Mute glances interchanged aside
Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
Mutual destruction to contrive.
Mutual repulsion and ennui,
My beauty, thou art ready too.
"My chum lives here," Bruin grunts out.
My country and an exile's lot;
My country's honour and repute
"My darling child, thou art in pain.--
"My darling, growing old am I!
My days of life approach their end,
My doom has been pronounced on high,
My famous portrait indicate
My friend, 'tis but to pay a debt,
My friends, what means this odd digression?
My frivolous and jolly youth.
My goddesses, where are your shades?
My gratitude do not disdain,
My guardian angel to the grave.
My heart of old would captivate.
My heart with but one look revive;
My heart's allegiance can resign,
"My heart's delight, thou art not well."--
My heroine, Tattiana dear.Vladimir, hourly more a slave
My image hath not disappeared,
My joy in youth was fleeting e'en
My light productions to retain,
My little book. With thee I knew
My lot is fixed--with thoughtlessness
My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
My memory wandered wide and sought
My morning birdie, yesternight
My mother-in-law who lately died
My mournful fate in verse to weave,
My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
My pen no longer finds delight,
My poor Tattiana cannot sleep
My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,
My poor Vladimir, bitter tears
My pretty self-deceiving maid--
My scholar without aptitude
."My second!" cried in turn Eugene,
My soul I cannot renovate--
My soul is filled with gratitude!
My spirit and my blood doth move,
My spirit with such pangs before.Another time, so willed it Fate,
My splendid house and gaieties--
My sportive Muse I used to take
My sum of happiness contained;
My tongue is somewhat rusty now.Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
"My uncle's goodness is extreme,
My unpretending page shall fill,
My venerated reader, oh!
My verses, kindly meant, would earn
My very latest composition!
My word of honour given have I.The tea, as I remarked, appeared,
My wretched Lenski's fate I mourn,
Mysteriously all objects near
Nags eighteen to the door are driven.
Napoleon tarried till it please
Nay! even as this instant fled,
Nay, near--but destiny decreed--
Ne'er touched her fingers indolent
Ne'er trusted to the treacherous ace.When, wise at length, we seek repose
Near Khariton's in a side street
Near young Tattiana resident,
Nearer they come--Eugene appears!
Nearest and dearest knew not how
Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,
Never for me to reappear--
Never upon my heroine
Next Saturday. The Larina
Night separated from her spouse,
No coquetry was there, I vouch--
No fond illusions live to soothe,
No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,
No greater pleasure can exist
No longer through her former home;
"No matter, look immediately.
"No misery I see in that"--
No more at dawn the shepherd will
No more remembered him; unto
No more the music thunders loud,
No more the village knows his face,
No more with pale Diana's rays,
No novelty--is it not true?--
No obstacle of which I know.
No one appeared to lend a hand.
No one my anguish comprehends,
No other book had time to read.
No other than Oneguine mine.
No sense was ever manifest
No senseless fashionable lay
No signs of trouble her accused,
No time to pick it up! afraid,
No trace ye left in passing by
No, ever to behold your face,
No, never in the early blaze
Noblesse and models of the mode,
None could a trace of that impute,
None could her beautiful declare,
None the conviction could withstand
None, be my witness Heaven above!
(Nonsense and pure absurdity,
Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,
Nor almanacs nor newspapers,
Nor at the hour of noon with sound
Nor aught confides unto the rest.Tattiana would have gladly heard
Nor beauties of far distant lands
Nor boston nor the world's affairs
Nor by her beauty she became
Nor by her sister's brilliancy
Nor dares the skirting of her dress
Nor did her blushes fade away,
Nor died nor lost his senses quite.
Nor discontinued to distress
Nor doth my absent pen portray
Nor enough strength of mind possessed
Nor even tears afford respite,
Nor frigid adulation paid.
Nor from the mob polite estranged,
Nor further comment that night made.
Nor homage which the Muse demands
Nor in his dreams anticipates
Nor interest in aught betrays.
Nor long his mind was agitated
Nor marked how summer's prime had fled
Nor on the letter yet hath she
Nor precepts sage nor pictures e'en,
Nor shall my pen paint terribly
Nor shall the bud of yesterday
Nor shall the caterpillar come
Nor slander viciously could spread
Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
Nor sudden turned she red or white,
Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
Nor the _Journal des Modes_, I vouch,
Nor the first snow of winter seize
Nor the frost particles inhale
Nor true unto her sorrow kept.
Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
Nor years of separation all
Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.
Not a bad fellow was her father
Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,
Not agony, but death expressed.
Not all will like myself proceed--
"Not at all."--"That I can't conceive!
Not bristled up like a wild beast,
Not daring to cast back her eyes.
Not even a poetic phrase,
Not high in general estimation;
"Not in the least, assured am I!"--
Not knowing its interpretation,
Not only sorrow--Ah! my dear,
Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
Not so! My Moscow never went
Not that she had his works perused,
Not the least trace Oneguine sees
Not the young timid maid, believe,
Not to behave as he did once--
Not, and a flood of bitter tears
"Nothing, good nurse, there's nothing wrong,
Nought but of dinners a long row,
Nought from his pen did ever flow,
Nought in the universe refused:
Nought of its charms original
November at the gate did stand.The morn arises foggy, cold,
Now Didelot scarce can be endured!"Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
Now I am fit for nothing here.
Now I am ready to refuse.
Now a long branch itself entwined
Now all things round about repeat
Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.
Now don't be cross with me, my soul,
Now for the first time I my Muse
Now for the jealous youth what joy!
Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,
Now her lithe form she arches o'er
Now it is ready to be sent--
Now of a family the head,
Now talkative, now reticent;
Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
Now we must separate. Good-bye!
Now with what eager interest
Now, as in a deserted house,
Now, like hereditary foes,
"Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.
O Brenta, once more we shall meet
O Men, how very like ye are
O Spring, thou chosen time of love!
O epic Muse, my powers increase
O feet, where'er your path extends
O my Svetlana.'--Joukovski
O triumphs of my guileless days,
O yes! my hopes soon disappeared."
O'er all a sheet of silvery dust
O'er hillock and o'er meadow throws.
O'er my remains to drop a tear,
O'erspread with Winter's carpet bright,
O'erwhelmed with guests; by families
Obedient then to Nature's law,
Obedient to the magic strings,
Obedient to warm Spring's commands.
Obeyed the impulses of heart?--
Oblivion of life's tempest dire,
Obsequious or indifferent!
Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
Of "comme il faut." Shishkoff, forgive!
Of Africa, ancestral land,
Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
Of Levshin's school ye followers,
Of London life is "vulgar" called
Of Olga he in song averred;
Of Russian domesticity;
Of Volga fishermen doth sing,
Of a heart cold and cynical?
Of a most mournful episode,
Of a strange night when the moon and--
Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
Of affectation innocent,
Of all the guests within his mind.Certainly not Eugene alone
Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.
Of censure for the same incurred;
Of churches, gardens, belfries high
Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
Of consolation all bereft--
Of conversation, thought and aims--
Of course Tattiana was annoyed
Of creditors a hungry rout
Of diplomats and warlike beaux
Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
Of dreary Russia left behind,
Of error and the passions' strife.
Of every sort and every set!"--
Of fashionable dames the foe,
Of fiery youth's untutored days
Of fleeting glory take no heed.
Of foreign whims the impersonation--
Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
Of friends the grateful intercourse--
Of friends unceremonious would
Of frivolous existence, friends;
Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
Of harmony enshrining thought.
Of her provincial innocence
Of his approach; but nothing cared
Of horn in circle call them round.
Of keen sarcastic intellect
Of kindly, dim antiquity,
Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,
Of languor and of love did tell
Of late I have been quite absurd,--
Of life or death predestinate.
Of love again, and yet again;
Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
Of many an economic scheme;
Of migratory gipsy hordes--
Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
Of modern Russians the disease.Bouyanoff, wrathful cousin mine,
Of my impassioned heroine.
Of my light paramour was proud.
Of old maids the divinity,
Of one thing till again we met.
Of passion reminiscences,
Of passion they so often raise.
Of pictures painful harrowing,
Of priceless value all things seem
Of roses to romancers dear;
Of rural life the sluggish stream;
Of serfs the farewell wail have given.
Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
Of such a dread hallucination.
Of sunset glow with rosy light,
Of tender years the modesty
Of thankless friends the circle rose,
Of the AEneid, but incorrect.
Of the Tattiana of times fled.
Of the commencement of the piece.
Of the cup brimming o'er with wine--
Of the domains of the side-scene.
Of the horizon she is like!"--
Of the imperial Neva's shore.
Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
Of the night sentinels arise
Of the romances she preferred,
Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,
Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
Of thy delights I drank my fill,
Of touching lightly every theme.
Of untold gain she must conceal,
Of what he thought and what believed,
Of what not, and of distant dim,
Of which the rustling woods remind?
Of whirligigs were very fond,
Of widow Clicquot or Moet
Of woe: effaced the pathway now:
Of woods and fields the calm retreat,
Of your perfections in my soul,
Of youthful impulse, reverie,
Oft staring through the window pane
Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
Oh! I accept. And instantly
"Oh! I remember, where is he?"--
"Oh! how our years are vanishing!"But nothing changed in them is seen,
"Oh! nurse, nurse, you don't understand!
Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
"Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
Oh! what had been his eminence!
"Oh! whither have ye winged your way,
Oh! who is not calumnious?
'Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
Oh, how her lips compressed restrain
Oh, many a year hath run its course
Old age through spectacles too peers,
Old women at the coachmen swear.
Olga and Tania led. Malign,
Olga began to long likewise
Olga he sees before his eyes
Olga ran skipping from the door.
Olga the tea must supervise--
Olga with trepidation dire.
Olga's admirer came that day:
"Olinka is her junior, see.
Ombre, and whist all others worth:
Omens inspired her soul with fear,
On Lenski's matrimonial fate
On Sundays by yon window he,
On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
On balls I madly used to dote,
On chairs in the saloon reposed,
On everything around her gaze,
On fresh allurements they are bent,
On guests their servants used to wait
On him spleen mounted sentinel
On horseback every day they ride--
On horseback gallop o'er the steppe!
On innocent delights I dote,
On iron bridges we shall gaze
On lines invisible are fixt;
On melted wax in water poured;
On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
On raptures, sorrows not her own,
On such a day. O Heavens, 'tis she!
On sunny days the glistening rime,
On the blue blocks of ice the rays
On the dull stage find all things changed,
On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
On thee I used to meditate!
On thigh or temple, friend on friend.Resolved the flirt to cast away,
On unknown female forms he throws.
On us beyond the grave attends,
On waves by tempests curdled o'er!
On whom a sister's heart was set
On winters of the south a skit,
Once more, when she appeared in sight,
One image occupied his mind,
One instrument for his own use--
One moment's slumber suffer not.
One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
Oneguine Olga bore away.
Oneguine acted very well
Oneguine could not now submit,
Oneguine fired--Alas! alas!
Oneguine his excuses says;
Oneguine knew enough, the rogue
Oneguine lightning glances shot;
Oneguine meditative stood,
Oneguine ne'er as poet showed
Oneguine oped the cupboards wide.
Oneguine sat the table by
Oneguine slowly then began
Oneguine then approached and said:
Oneguine to the window went
Oneguine waits on us, 'tis like."
Oneguine was a citizen
Oneguine was the most impressed,
Oneguine was--so many deemed,
Oneguine wasted; on my word,
Oneguine went with trepidation
Oneguine's cheek grew ashy pale,
Oneguine's letter!"--"Ah! the thing!
Oneguine's pencillings. His mind
Oneguine's speeches I abhorred
"Oneguine, I was younger then,
Oneguine, O my gentle readers,
"Oneguine, all this sumptuousness,
Oneguine, bored to death again,
Oneguine, by first impulse moved,
Oneguine, hast forgotten yet
Oneguine--take him up again--
Oneguine--the beloved place
Only her countenance assumed
Open the window--sit by me."
Opened the portals of the tomb
Opened with care, and entering bore
Openly or 'neath decent cloak.
Opens unto her visitor.
Oppressive now is happiness,
Oppressor of the wretched poor;
Or "Idol mio," and in the grate
Or Bogdanovitch's sweet lays.
Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
Or a good fellow for the nonce,
Or a professor in tulle cap.
Or a swift hare from mead to mead
Or a swift meteor, may be,
Or any trifle else ye like
Or at a promenade mayhap,
Or better,--like a faithful wife.I was for calm existence made,
Or bosom full of languid fire,--
Or but for fame he saw the light;
Or by a card our homage pay,
Or by the ocean's rocky shore.
Or counting on his uncle's death
Or couplets more ingenious still;
Or did her tears soon cease to flow?
Or e'en Istomina, my dear,
Or e'en the "Demon" of my strain.
Or else ,
Or even overcome by wrath
Or even, silent and resigned,
Or faults of grammar on its page--
Or for the solitary tomb
Or he dispersed the motley crowd
Or ice and flame, are not diverse
Or if he meant to flirt again,
Or in a squabble to engage,
Or innocently past me fly.
Or into bold hands anxiously
Or kiss the border of her dress.To Olga frequently he would
Or letters of a maiden young.And by degrees upon him grew
Or monster of Satanic pride,
Or other mask donned playfully?
Or parody of modern ways?Hath she found out the riddle yet?
Or quietly partake our woe.
Or recognized not in the crowd.
Or reconciled them, it may be,
Or suffering pride? Why is he there?
Or that adoring Grandison
Or the delivery of a note.
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Or to disturb my dreams approach
Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.She seemed of him oblivious,
Or torturer malevolent?
Or vainly 'mid luxurious fare
Or will my melancholy glance
Or, after dinner's dull repast,
Or, as it were, the Freischutz' score
Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,
Or, heedless of the leaves' return
Or, it may be, we inly seek,
Or, parable more flattering,
Or, strange to me is happiness?
Or, when anew all Nature teems,
Or, with a pen and colours fit,
Original imagination,
Other and colder thoughts affright,
Our bridges long neglected rot,
Our dear old aunt, Princess Helene,
Our fathers used to dote upon;
Our godlike tongue she could exchange
Our heroes at full gallop sped,
Our idol, Honour's motive force,
Our liberty at least survives:
Our misanthrope was full of ire,
Our paradise is no more sweet.Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,
Our roads transformed the eye will strike;
Our tender dreamer had enrolled
Our union would produce but grief.
Our youthful wanderer should roam.
Ourselves as unities to count;
Outlandish and provincial,
Outside descend the mists of night.
Page after page continued reading,
Pair after pair the race sustain.
Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
Pallid and melancholy face,
Pallid and with dishevelled hair,
Pardon I ask for such a sin--
Paris and Menelaus right.
Park, garden, palings, yard below
Passed into dull eternity,
Passes the torrent But alack!
Passion's wild sway I then allowed,
Past darkened windows and long streets
Past palaces and nunneries,
Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,
Pedantic although scholar like,
Pelagie Nikolavna has
Pen, paper bring: the table too
Perceived that he was still beloved,
Perchance he will to all the three.
Perchance one more affectionate.
Perchance they laurels also cull--
Perchance upon the Neva e'en
Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
Perchance you also soon may burn,
Perched on a goose's neck a skull
Perish absorbed by Lethe's stream.
Perish when half disclosed its bloom!"--
Permit me; is it worth the trouble
Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,
Pervaded with much common sense.
Perverse, unfavourable views?
Petoushkoff met the selfsame doom.
Petoushkoff, the provincial swell;
Petrovski Palace! Gloomily
Petrovski Palace; come, astir!
Phials of crystal scents enclose.
Philanthropist or patriot,
Philosopher just turned eighteen.China and bronze the tables weight,
Pictures of the amusing scene,
Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,
Placed at the customary range;
Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
Plates, knives and forks are clattering
Please follow this way, lady mine,
Please her by their decorum fixed,
Poetic transport did infuse,
Poetic transport. They impart
Poetical enthusiast,
Polite demeanour to preserve,
Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,
"Poor Yorick," mournfully he said,
Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,
Portray the solitary den
Portrayed contemporary man
Possess my love and sympathy.
Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
Possession hath no power to please,
Pour on this orb a dazzling light
Pray is it he? It is the same.
Pray is it not a tough affair
Present me."--"You are joking."--"No."--
Presentiments oppressed her heart.
Presents her quarto amiably,
Preserves and an eternal prattle
Prevailed at last. She in reply
Priams of country populations
Proceeds, until she from a hill
Professions eagerly for deeds,
Profiles of lovely dames he knows
Prophecies, threats and apparitions,
Proud of his dinners and his wife!
Providence otherwise may deem--
Pursues phantasmagoria vain.Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?--
Pursuits I followed of the crowd,
_Qu'ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
Quarrels among young friends he bred
Questions and news and tittle-tattle,
Quick to the country let us wend
Quite a sensation; the position
Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
Raged round him and of balked desire!
Raises within my breast as oft
Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,
Reader, whoever thou mayst be,
(Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
Rebuffed--as quickly reassured,
Received him freely at her house,
Recent instructions of its mother.But Tania ne'er displayed a passion
Reduced with effort unto sense,
Reform me both in deed and word,
Regained authority awhile,
Rekindled in my withered heart
Relate some ancient history."
Remained unnoticed. Once he went
Remained with him the youthful maid.
Remains on earth the unseemly rage,
Remarkable. She then indeed
Removed her to his country seat,
Renowned for his acumen, wit,
Repentance wields not now her spell
Replace the visions fancy drew;
Replaced them in their box, undressed
Repose from labour, satire keen,
Repose her silken curtains fled,
Repose in peace, thou child of song_."
Rescue me from oblivion.Perchance some heart 'twill agitate,
Reserved, but not inanimate,
Resounding through all ages might
Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
Restrained the impulses of youth;
Retained the image, though short-lived,
Returning, from his ship amid
_Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie_.
Reviews both dress and countenance,
Rings from a dish of water full
Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
Rogue and extortioner of yore,
Romance of love I pray refer,
Romances three, in which ye scan
Rooted unto the spot remained.As if against obstruction sore
Round which revolves the universe.
Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
Rousseau, I would remark in passing,
Rural LifeCanto The FourthThe less we love a lady fair
Russia's Terpsichore review
Said something in an undertone
Sailed silently in unison--
Sails her allotted course on high,
Saint Priest, who every album's page
Sang childhood's pastimes and its joy,
Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
Satan will jest, and at love's cost.Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,
"Say, of the two which was Tattiana?"
Scarce credits what his eyes can see.Hark! the mazurka. In times past,
Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
Scarce to her questions he responds,
Scarcely in Russia can ye find
Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
Scissors both straight and curved as well,
Scornfully challenged you afield--
Seated, a curious look with glasses
Secret excursions made in sleighs;
Secure in rural quietude--
_Sed alia tempora_. And bravery
Seductive cup of love, whose flow
Seductive, animated, bright,
See, I can hardly crawl about--
Seeing in this no deprivation,
Seek the forgotten countenance
Seeks, winding amid meadows still,
Seemed in a haze of green embowered.
Seems so unnatural and absurd:
Seen all, beside himself with wrath,
Sees where a noble mansion stood,
Selfish nonentities around?
Serious endeavours to assure
Servant of God and brigadier,
Serve who could neither read nor write.Time was, in style magniloquent
Seven days and nights the travellers plod.
Shaking with serious air the head,
Shall I behold thee once again?"--
"Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?
Shall I your chorus hear anew,
Shall abdicate the bard's profession,
Shall my declining years beguile;
Shall surely, be it soon or late,
"Shall we commence?"--"Let it be so,"
Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
She bows her head beneath the crown;
She brought with her the gift of song.
She buries deep within her breast
She calm and unconcerned appears.The husband comes and interferes
She cannot draw a breath or stir.
She cannot--Eugene oped the door
She cannot--then impatiently
She comprehends. The simple maid
She consolation thence obtained--
She could not sleep in her new bed.
She deemed its outline might afford.
She did not think "procrastination
She dreamt she journeyed o'er a field
She drinks in those seductive deeds!
She enters a deserted yard--
She fears and like an arrow rushes
She fears she cannot.--Cannot? Why?--
She found herself alone at last,
She from the winter corn espies
She gazed around her--it was day.
She gazed thereon, and instant beat
She gazed--a cue, forgotten long,
She got a book of nursery tales,
She heard of servant-maids the note,
She hears of conversation nought
She hears the bear behind her press,
She heaves a sigh and deep intent
She hid the trouble of her breast,
She is an angel! We sometime
She led me through nocturnal mist
She leisurely away doth ride,
She mourned and to the moon would raise
She murmurs in an undertone
She muses: "What was Olga's fate?
She ne'er repeated unto hers.
She nerves herself from her alarm
She never more his face may view,
She never of deception dreamed
She on the apparition gazed,
She oped her eyes and cried: 'tis he!
She peeped through a chink of the door.
She promised Eugene, or she would
She rose--departed. But Eugene
She runs, the bear upon her trail,
She seeks the garden in her need--
She sits alone--'tis ever _she!_So frequently his mind would stray
She soon forgot, began to call
She starts, nor doth a word express,
She strains her throat to force a cry--
She struggled hard at first thus pent,
She the acquaintances she loves,
She the delicious novel reads,
She trembled and grew deadly pale.
She visited the humble tents
She waited for--I don't know whom!
She waits, on fire her trembling frame--
She wanders aimless as a sprite,
She was as heedless and as gay--
"She who with melancholy face
She will not see, she will not hear.
She wore her corset tightly bound,
She would pronounce _a la Francaise_;
She, than the morning moon more pale,
Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
Shines in the female firmament
Shone pungent Satire's dauntless king,
Should be respected throughout life
Should dearly like a dance again.
Should go, the market for a maid,
Should make me much more circumspect,
Should recompense his idle jeers,
Shouts of applause! Oneguine passes
Shouts, laughter, jamming 'gainst the wall,
Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,
Shy, silent did the maid appear
Sickness more courage doth command
Sighs on another than her lord
Silent, oracular ye'd see him
Silk tapestry upon the wall,
Silvers the brook; the shepherd's horn
Simeon Petrovitch just as shabby;
Similar dames ye may have seen.
Simple and kindly and unwed,
Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
Since I beheld Eugene and young
Since in these arms I thee did bear--
Since leisure was together spent,
Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
Sincerely loving him, Eugene
Singing God knows what maid admired,
Singing in chorus all the while.
Singing inside her hut the maid
"Sit down. How funny, to be sure!
Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
Sits by her gloomily, desponds,
Sits down and gazes on all sides--
Sledging, the snows, which at the time
Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
Slept o'er the river misty grown.
Slow circling round its fellow swings
Slowly exhausted by desire,
Slumber still o'er him lingering flies.
Snorts, and his rider bends his course
(So 'twas with us in former years,
So Tania to her heart's content
So ancient warriors, battles o'er,
So ardently did I desire
So be it! But internal strife
So be it! Just the laws which bid
So from the mountain lazily
So full of piety, correct,
So hearken, every worthy spouse,
So inaccessible to men,
So irremissible appear?O ye whom tender love hath pained
So let us to the ball-room haste,
So many neighbours here exist--
So meantime let him joyous live
So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit--
So prudent, and so circumspect
So she her silken sash unlaced,
So she in French herself expressed.
So there will be a dance to-night.
So uncongenial to my mind,
So, when he came next day to call,
Society endures not such!
Society he duped enow."
Society renounced once more.
Sombre or glad in turn to be,
Some Russian authors he perused--
Some a mazurka occupies,
Some are afar and some are dead.
Some army poet therein may
Some day I'll somehow finish it.
Some future ignoramus shall
Some madrigal not worth a rush,
Some marriageable maids behold,
Some nice instructive novel read,
Some one or other editor
Some other long-departed Spring,
Some wretched journal in his hand;
Sometime collected, shall relate
Sometimes by pleasing flattery's art,
Sometimes by ready-made despair;
Soon the maid on a chair he seats,
Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
Sorrow to counterfeit and wail--
Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
Spanned the unbridled torrent o'er;
Spare yourself unavailing pain
Spared him not their asperities.
Spectacles upon nose, all day
Speech was so tame and colourless
Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
Spite of herself with Lenski's lot
Spoiled children most degenerate
Spring cheered him up, and he resigned
Spring summons you to her green bowers,
Spring's paramour, pours forth her song
Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;
Stately, devoid of prejudice,
Sterner solicitudes engage,
Stiff, overstarched and insolent,
Still certain authors, I may add,
Still doth the misanthrope appear?
Still eats and drinks enough for twain.Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.
Still everywhere, without, within,
Still for ever fare thee well.'--Byron
Still happier he who ne'er hath known!
Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.
Still of his club he member was--
Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
Stood as estranged from all aloof,
Stood as if struck by lightning fire.
Stops at the tomb in passing by;
Straight for the entrance then he made
Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
Straight from their province had he come?"--
Strange unto her each childish game,
Streams excavate subaqueous ways,
Strictly the Carnival observed,
Striking the intellect with awe
Struck Lenski dead--across the scene
Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o'er.I write to you! Is more required?
Subdued him, when his neighbour stept
Submissive as if in a swoon,
Subscribed, _toujours a vous, Annette;_
Successfully to please her tried,
Such am I. This did ye expect,
Such is the country custom good;
Such open-hearted innocence.
Such was Oneguine's sainted life,
Such were the musings of Eugene.
Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
Suddenly to the left hand side,
Suitable for this semi-Russian.
Surveying them, she thus doth say:
Swearing how Lenski he would rile,
Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
Sweet to behold him obstinate,
Sweeter it is, my friends, if he
Swift following in her wake, the sun,"
Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
Take to their wings and fly away.But to Oneguine! _A propos!_
Tall, slender, like thy form designed,
Tania doth by the casement linger
Tania the meaning would obtain
Tania well nigh expired when he
"Tania, my eldest child, you know"--
Tania, observed by nobody,
Tattiana
Tattiana as enchanted stood;
Tattiana asks, and hurriedly
Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick--
Tattiana by a poor aunt's side,
Tattiana certainly infers
Tattiana courage doth regain
Tattiana doth accept his aid;
Tattiana every day conferred
Tattiana faltered, and became
Tattiana finds in loneliness.
Tattiana from the hill descends
Tattiana gazed with curious eye
Tattiana gazes on the moon,
Tattiana gently led them there.And long her eyes as through a haze
Tattiana in a misty dream,
Tattiana in despair unfeigned
Tattiana in the yard appears
Tattiana in the young princess!
Tattiana in traditions old
Tattiana learns the intelligence--
Tattiana loved as when a lad,
Tattiana more than ever burned
Tattiana motionless abides.The strife grew furious and Eugene
Tattiana o'er the stream complained;
Tattiana purchased with a stray
Tattiana saw with trepidation
Tattiana suffered secretly;
Tattiana tears cannot restrain.The limits of enlightenment
Tattiana terrified awoke.
Tattiana thanks to all returned,
Tattiana through the forest erred,
Tattiana to a corner, bids
Tattiana to the index flies
Tattiana waits. No answer came!
Tattiana with impatience waited
Tattiana would attempt to fly,
Tattiana's beauty, pale with care,
Tattiana's letter I possess,
Tattiana's love was quite sincere,
Tattiana's trouble might have spied,
Tattiana, Russian to the core,
Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?"--
Tattiana--thus the sex is born.--
Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
Tell me, of sentiments concealed
"Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?"
Tend not my heart to mitigate,
Tender and elevated, free?
Terpsichore alone among
Terrible tales she loved to hear.
Terror of guardians of the night;
Than cold Oneguine's oddities,
Than health, so with a trembling hand
Than one's own fascinating self.Here I remark all poets are
That Heaven her character had blent
That I am rich, a prince's wife?--
That I forget not whom I sing.
That I to you reveal my mind?
That Nina's marble symmetry,
That a friend's arm in every case
That afterwards with evil smile
That all may hear his voice's tone.Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
That bilberry wine, I'm sore afraid,
That certain volumes she might read.Adieu she to the matron said
That chosen heroes consecrate,
That crass stupidity misleads,
That every morn at Verrey's cost
That first the Muse appeared to me.
That for that matter in my verse
That girl whom once on a time he
That girl--but he must dreaming be--
That glimmered through the radiant night
That grandmothers and grandsires may
That guests approach: and when above
That he was "ready any day."
That heart with inspiration sweet
That hero, though his merit shone,
That is, he could elucidate
That like a friendly voice its tone
That mediocrity alone
That mind which yearns for space is bound?
That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.
That my dishonour would ensure
That our desires which noblest seemed,
That rascal Lovelace she abused;
That soon I reach my thirtieth year?And so my noon hath come! If so,
That the two friends with morning's light
That until Christmas comes again
That vanished are my youthful days,
That vicious set whom I don't blame--
That we by cant ourselves deceive,
That we her constantly betrayed
That year the autumn season late
That youthful heart--"But, now at least,
That, for the century designed,
That, tipsy once in actual fight,
The "in memoriam" pages sought,
The Country DamselCanto The Third"Whither away? Deuce take the bard!"--
The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
The Fete
The German baker looks around
The God of Love is after you!A coquette loves by calculation,
The Great World
The Larinas unwisely went,
The Larinas were since sunrise
The Larinas would celebrate,
"The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!"--
The Lord deliver her and save!
The Lovelaces are out of date,
The Medal Otchakoff conferred!
The Muse abandoned, ta'en a wife,
The Muse capricious let us coax,
The Muse revealed her first delight,
The Neva's Cleopatra, and
The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,
The Paris of those country parts
The PoetCanto The SecondThe village wherein yawned Eugene
The Princess N. will be at home
The Russian N with nasal sound
The Russian language I deem vile
The Russian winter did adore
The accents wild of other's woes,
The aged mother, bathed in tears,
The aged nurse in ample gown,
The aged woman in her woe:
The all-entrancing joys of love--
The altar flame was quenched in night.Tranquil he lay, and strange to view
The amatory science warm,
The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
The artful prisoner should seek
The artifice of villany--
The aspect of a landscape drear.
The avalanche of snow first bends,
The ball in all its splendour shone.I tried when I began this tale,,
The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
The bard his answer waits at home,
The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
The bard's enthusiastic strain,
The bath on Saturdays attended,
The bays of age and helplessness.
The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
The bee forth from his cell of wax
The beldam saith: "The hearth, by it
The blessings of humanity.Or, it may be, the bard had passed
The blood boiled and the passions strove.
The blood gushed from the wound and steamed
The body they consigned to rest,
The boy was wild but full of grace.
The breath of Spring again renewed,
The bridegroom sage without delay
The bridge and alley to the lake,
The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,
The calm existence which I prize
The captain of a company.
The captives of the Salguir's shore.
The chaise long ordered please employ,
The channel of the river stilled
The chief of the Chaldean wise,
The child of sloth and liberty.
The china teapot too ye might
The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
The clue unto some mystery
The coach before a house stood still.
The coach is borne o'er ruts and holes,
The cold reply with gloomy mien
The cold sweat bursting from his brow,
The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!
The coming of life's Autumn drear.
The company deep silence guard.
The comrade of your youth should strike,
The connoisseur his glances throws
The contact of the foot I raised
The conversation tedious
The conversation was revived
The converse of our hermits twain,
The converse of the world polite,
The cool dark oaken grove to range,
The counsel good and full of reason,
The country hath its liberties
The crafty spouse caressed him, who
The crash of music, candles' glare
The credulous indeed are blest,
The crowd and merriment and light,
The crowd doth head and shoulders rise
The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,
The crystals of her vestibule
The curs away to kennel chase,
The curse of commonplace delight.
The curtain now they slowly raise.
The cynosure of every eye.
The damsel under escort place."Can I inspect the mansion, please?"
"_The date, his fleeting years how long--
The days of love and of romance!
The days which to your youth belong?
The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
The deuce with my inside has played."
The die is cast! Thine is my life!
The disenchanted glass direct
The door flew open--Olga came,
The doors swing open: Lenski makes
The drama of my youth was played.
The dream left terror in its train.
The drive becomes monotonous--
The drum already doth arouse.
The dusty chronicles of earth
The early days of life we sought.
The early tinkling of the bells
The easier 'tis to gain her grace,
The epistle from the bard presents.
The epitaph on marble shows:
The evanescent fashions fly
The excited hero in a trice
The eyes of a grave general.
The fair of the next generation,
The fair, nor parted with regret,
"The family are all quite well--
The family of Kharlikoff,
The family of children hie.
The fashionable rhymester's heart!
The fatal bullet penetrate,
The fatal hour had come at last--
The fatal secrets of the grave,
The fatal tubes Lepage contrived
The fated nutriment desired;
The father scarcely understands
The feeble moment would espy
The feet of graceful ladies fly,
The feet of my dear lady friends.
The fervid poet would recite,
The fever of the blood to slake--
The fire extinguished in his breast,
The fire of the nocturnal lights;
The fires of passion and its smart--
The firmament in mellow light,
The first appearance of the snows
The first bright wreathing storm of snow
The first-fruits of my tale I read,
The fisher's fire afar illumes
The flimsy wares of Western marts,
The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
The foaming Lenski would refuse,
The foes with downcast eyes abide.Foes! Is it long since friendship rent
The foes, as yet not taking aim,
The forests in mysterious gloom
The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,
The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
The freshness of her heart impair,
The friend of liberty and laws
The friends are called and quickly placed.Right opposite Tattiana placed,
The frolics of maidens.They sang, whilst negligently seated,
The fruits of learning and combined
The fruits of science, evil, good,
The general who accompanies.
The giddy world at last shall see.
The gifted songster never swerved,
The gilding of life's vanities,
The girl in marriage they unite.
The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
The glass unwittingly inspect
The goblet still is bubbling bright--
The goddess would a masquerade
The golden ember now enshrines,
The gossip of their ladies fair.Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
The guests make room; aside each takes
The hamlet, the poor villagers,
The happiest days of life employ?Love, flowers, the country, idleness
The heart of the inveterate flirt!
The heavens shone in deeper blue,
The height of fashion, fitting tight,
The hero is of my narration!
The hero we immortalize.
The hero's name too in advance,
The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice
The horizon luminous doth grow,
The hostess doth interrogate:
The hour when--Fate so willed--we met
The house and garden I would see."
The household property contain:
The household troop of little boys,
The hussar Pykhtin was accused.
The idols of their adoration
The image of her seal impressed.
The imagination to enliven
The indignation of her heart!
The inmate is for ever dumb,
The inscription o'er the gates of Hell
The insensate fire of love still glowed
The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,
The journey in a sledge doth please,
The kennel or a kindred line,
The ladies' dresses airy, light,
The ladies' laughter to provoke.
The ladies, their fantastic dress,
The lady in the crimson cap
The lady's glance upon him fell--
The lamps illuminating shine;
The lancer, to his calling bound,
The landscape which the moonbeams fret,
The language of her girlish pleading
The languid eye of love-sick maids,
The languid mind could smile at nought,
The last poor obol I was worth--
The laws of generations past,
"The left? Why, what on earth is there?"--
The letter is the thing, you see,--
The letter which Tattiana wrote.
The lily's stem to eat away,
The little solitary nook
The lively trash of stories long
The lonely mansion-house to screen
The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
The maid whose note he still possessed
The maiden at her casement sits
The maiden's weary eye which yearned,
The maids beside Tattiana keep--
The malady of hopeless love
The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,
The man and liked his company,
The manly toga scarce assumed,
The manners of the highest class
The master always used to sit."Departed Lenski here to dine
The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
The matter by his conscience tried,
The matter did not agitate,
The medium is required of gold.
The memory of the bard was driven
The memory of the bard, a dream,
The men salute with lower bows
The military band will play.
The misanthrope of gloomy brow,
The miserable bard to meet,
The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
The moderns of the ancients rave--
The moment for revenge, meanwhile,
The monsters of the British Muse
The moon in the blue atmosphere.
The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
The moon, the stars, and shining night--
The most industrious man alive
The motley moving mass and bright,
The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
The mystic lines to tear away
The mystic monogram, O. E.
The native Russian tongue impeach?
The natural fickleness of passion,
The needle nor, o'er framework bent,
The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
The neighbours come, in sledge approach,
The new moon's crescent slim she spied,
The nightingale there all night long,
The nightingale trills forth her tune;
The nights of golden Italy
The old Derjavine noticed me,
The old man who has had his freaks,
The olden time shall be my theme.Old people's simple conversations
The opportunity is flown.
The pains of night have wholly fled,
The pall of night was growing thin,
The parquet cracked beneath the heel,
The passionate speeches I'll repeat,
The path of hope and tender fear--
The path which leads to glory's goal.
The peace which on his forehead beamed,
The peasant blessed his happy fate.
_The peasants there are rich as kings,
The perfidies I recollect
The pervert world with icy chill
The pile of books, with carpet spread
The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.Already crisp hoar frosts impose
The poet fell; already men
The poet from Tamboff secured,
The poet's fervid conversation
The poet's hour hath sounded--See!
The poet's madness? for 'tis hard
The poet, modest though so grand,
The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
The poor girl fell into a faint,
"The post hath kept him, it is like."
The powder in the pan is laid,
The prejudices all men have,
The prince's eye Oneguine seeks:
The princess from the sofa cried
The proud ones are not worth the fire
The purest of the dreams we dreamed,
The reaping girls approach and ply
The remnant destiny concedes,
The rigour of cold pride and all
The riot of the world and glare
The river through the linden wood.
The river's bank. Tattiana lone
The room my former master used.
The ruts of his own fatherland.Yet on a frosty winter day
The sad moon only could remark.
The same unmoved oblivion
The same warm vision constantly;
The secrets of maidens.
The secrets of the marriage state
The seemly crowd, partaking nought
The serpent to unlawful trees
The servants used to congregate
The sharp flint, screwed securely on,
The sharp incisions of his nail,
The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,
The shining orbs of night appear;
The shining river clothed in ice;
The shopman and the pedlar rise
The shutters open; to the skies
The silent fields no peasant nears,
The simple epitaph--a tear
The sleep-compelling Grandison,
The sneers of critics superfine;
The snow upon the streets doth melt--
The snows from off the hills around
The solstice of our earthly years,
The sorrows of a single state.
The speech of man and tramp of horse.
The starry beacons fade away,
The steed benumbed still pawing stands
The steward sent a note to tell
The stomach doth admonish us.
The storm was hushed. The blossom fair
The story of his young love's dream,
The story of thy life and fate.
The strange apartment her oppressed:
The style in which my hero dressed;
The style of wise antiquity.
The sudden rattling of a car.
The sum of my existence gone
The sun had mounted high his steep,
The swain of Julia Wolmar,
The table with its lamp unlit,
The tale of these romantic men;
The third at night. Tattiana wakes
The thirst for fame and man's applause,
The thirst of knowledge and of fame,
The thunderbolt on you descend!
The tightened leathern rein she draws,
The time between the wolf and dogs--
The time for mystic strolls which late
The time when Melancholy's claw
The tiny sun shone less on high
The tiresome man, her value knowing,
The torment born of crime unseen,
The torrent of opinion,
The traveller, bird of passage he,
The trees in silvery array,
The triumph of a conquest new.
The troop of apparitions fled,
The twenty-sixth year of his age,
The twilight pale which softens all,
The two friends' compliments she hears
The two old ladies then embraced
The unaffected traits she now
The unbidden guests he roughly chides--
The uncontaminated kiss
The untutored spirit's pangs calmed down
The valleys dried and gaily flowered;
The venerable dame opined
The verst posts catch the vacant eye
The very morning of our days.He who hath lived and living, thinks,
The vestibule finds empty quite--
The vile seducer shall not dare
The voice of jealousy is drowned.In my young days of wild delight
The voice of lovers, foes and friends,
The votary of vain delight
The weary way still incomplete,
The wedding-day had been arranged,
The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,
The wind rose instantly, blew out
The windows whitened, shutters close--
The wit of others to acquire.
The witching light of sympathy;
The wolf upon the highways bold
The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
The woods, still naked to the view,
The words _bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,
The words and looks of charmers sweet
The workpeople she superintended,
The works of Mr. Richardson.She was thus fond of Richardson
The world enough. Congratulate
The world is ever altering!
The young Simeonova too there
The young proprietor we find;
"The younger, you're in love with her!"
The youthful lover once again
The youthful poet's fond confession.
Thee but a little space bewept,
Thee only would I choose, in truth,
Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
Their Jealousy and separation
Their branches by the snow bowed down.
Their claims and explanations shout.
Their coming which no man expects,
Their giddy sports she ne'er enjoyed.She loved upon the balcony
Their glory with their heels of red
Their harmless conversation blends
Their heroes used to represent
Their idols they were wont to invest
Their insolence and waistcoats white
Their looks alone produce the spleen.
Their memory lingers still and seems
Their natural attractions lend
Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
Their offspring's innocent flirtations
Their own productions, some insist
Their privileged allurements fire
Their slander e'en was weariness;
Their voices nought to her impart
"Then amongst strangers I was left--
Then be it so! My destiny
Then became busy with the house,
"Then come with me." The prince proceeds,
Then dressed himself...
Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
Then glittering in the sun descends.
Then handed her the song with grace.Congratulations, toasts resound,
Then he'd malign them secretly
Then in the silent cabinet
Then it may be, O flattering tale,
Then my companions young with pleasure
Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
"Then send your grandson quietly
Then suddenly discharge a joke
Then the old dames in chorus sing,
Then they came easily enow,
Then they're so innocent of vice,
Then to reward such confidence
Then to some gallant in your turn
Then touching Olga they depart
Then weeping she sank back distressed
Then would we muse as in a trance,
Then ye were barely generous,
Then, I say truly, none but thee
Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:
Then, her distraction to allay,
"Then, in the country, is't not true?
Then, the far capital forgot,
Then, then--well, in some solitude
There Didelot became glorious,
There an imperious skeleton;
There came a sudden flash of light,
There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,
There friends of pure delight had been
There is a spot the village near
There is no fishmarket retort
There is no path; the storm hath strewn
There is no stupid calumny
There is no wreath upon the bough:
There jars of cider block the way,
There long time sad at heart he stayed:
There our Katenine did revive
There the confusion, pressure, heat,
There the tired ploughman loves to lie,
There was no angling for success.
There! take it quickly, if ye must).
There'll be a fight. I do not lie.
There, aping Gulnare's bard, he spanned
There, in that knot of company,
There, there, beneath the side-scene's shade
Thereon the passing traveller read:
These are your relatives, believe:
These evenings as in days of old
These friends cold-bloodedly draw near
These take their seats; the coach of state
These to the coach of state are bound,
They are all natural and low,
They blossom, ripen and they fall
They crack a feeble joke and smile--
They deem her somewhat finical,
They disappeared by stealth and guile,
They first of all my brow did wreathe
They growl a bit--they scandalise--
They hand in hand to table go.
They have invited you this week.""Me?"--"Yes! It is Tattiana's fete
They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,
They long ago had held debate.
They long at home have her expected--
They made him feel inclined to doze;
They may forget that we exist.
They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
They sat, but conversation's flow
They sent their compliments--but oh!
They shout and no one lists at all.
They shovel silver with a spade,
They stir the heart as heretofore.
They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.
They were the wonderful traditions
They will receive us with delight."
They wish that ladies should, I hear,
They would not solemnly debate
Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
Thine honour is my countersign!Tattiana moans and now she sighs
Thinking to float upon the stream,
Thinking: 'tis foolish to disturb
This anchorite amid his waste
(This by command; for it was found,
This evanescent boyish bliss.
This gentle daring who could guess?
This glitter, riot, emptiness,
This great discovery relief
This he believed: a kindred spirit
This is my master's sitting-room.
This life in masquerade concealed,
This lot in life with stern decree?"Ideas and time ne'er backward move;
This monument of thought profound
This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
This separated us as well--
This was his social character.
This wicked, that absurd he deems,
This world. I do not praise desire,
This, this were true felicity!
Thither hussars on leave will stray
Thither in future to proceed
Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
Those whom we ought to love, caress,
Thou also, my ideal true,
Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!
Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
Thou hast resigned thy destiny
Thou too farewell, my liberty!
Thou'lt quaff love's sweet envenomed stream,
Thou'lt suffer, dearest, but before,
Though Baratynski verses penned,
Though I confess I hardly dare
Though I'll return to him right early,
Though around honoured Priam's throne
Though beauty he no more adored,
Though by an error and unsought--
(Though certainly mankind he knew
Though correspondence as a rule
Though dazzling its effulgence white,
Though deep he sinks into the drift;
Though for his Helen Menelaus
Though he advanced unceasingly.
Though he surveyed her at his ease,
Though hitherto a lady ne'er
Though late, have a beginning made.
Though now my love might be intense,
Though of romance therein I fail
Though scarcely following what was said,
Though some men, evilly disposed,
Though superannuated rather;
Though the foul vision promise made
Though to the Academy I come
Though we will not acknowledge it.
Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
Though without palaces and streets,
Though, God be praised! he ne'er designed
Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.
Three mortal hours per diem he
Three pairs of handsome female feet;
Three tears they dropt with humble mein
Thrice happy who their agonies
Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
Through dense aristocratic rows
Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
Thus a guest with composure will
Thus age approached, the common doom,
Thus carelessly I once portrayed
Thus haughty, careless in her tone?He quits the fashionable throng
Thus having braved Apollo's rage
Thus her perversity hath shown.
Thus in the earth the seed expands
Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
Thus oft--this I myself confess--
Thus our light race grows up and lives,
Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
Thus the time passes and meanwhile
Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise
Thus to assassinate the eve?"--
Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
Thus we began our little tale--
Thus, praised be God! a reputation
Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,
Thy cheek is as a poppy red!""Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!"--
Thy dove, thy darling little pet
Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,
Thy meditative incantation--
Till January fell no snow--
Till absently Vladimir took
Till amid trees a hovel showed,
Till carriage lamps, a double row,
Till morn--life uniform but gay,
Till out of breath upon a seatShe sank.--
Till proper rings could be procured.
Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
Till the mazurka's close he stays,
Time to denote by dinner, tea,
Time was the flattering voice of fame,
Time was when cold seduction strove
Time was, a valiant general might
Time was, his raillery was gay,
Time was, the breath of early dawn
Time was, the poet's tender quill
Time was, two maidens from their home
Time will the ravages efface--
Time without me will lessons give,
Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
Time-honoured Kremlin's keys present.
Tired by the ball's incessant noise,
Tiresome unto her hath become
'Tis Heaven's will and I am thine.
'Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_"
'Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
'Tis a scene of romance, I vow!"
'Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
'Tis day, the family downstairs,
'Tis done. To supper they proceed.
'Tis dreadful--ye agree, I hope--
'Tis evidently Heaven's will
'Tis fearful to anticipate
'Tis finished. Horrible to read!
'Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
"'Tis habit, Lenski."--"Is your ill
'Tis here he slept, his coffee took,
'Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee
'Tis in your power now, if desired,
'Tis noisome to her there: in thought
'Tis not so now. Like gentle dames
'Tis now the hillock now the rill
'Tis now the season! Idlers all,
'Tis said you are a misanthrope,
'Tis silent all! Alone the cries
'Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
'Tis silent--on her shines the moon--
'Tis something of this sort I deem.
'Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;
'Tis there that arrant fops display
'Tis time for supper, now for bed,
'Tis time she to the altar went!
"'Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.
'Tis time to marry her, 'tis true,
'Tis time to quit this weary shore
"'Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
Titles and ages intermixed.
To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
To Eve the universal mother,
To God eternal hymns of praise.
To Lucifer the cock must breathe
To Olga Petoushkova darts:
To Russ indigenous are not;
To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,
To a surrender gave consent,
To accompany him and to escort
To agitate me in my dreams.When, where, and in what desert land,
To all good neighbours' sport conduced.
To all she answers cruelly--
To an assembly--she appeared
To anticipate the break of day,
To arid selfishness resigned,
To arm the tongue and e'en the eye,
To array himself in evening dress.
To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;
To ask her name the trouble took.
To banish far unworthy themes
To be a charming mystery:
To be in conversation clear
To bear love's parching agonies--
To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.
To bring behind: the triple steeds
To burn, yet reason keep awake
To captivate her how devoted!
To cheat the inexperienced fair,
To clank the spur, delight the fair--
To classicism I've homage paid,
To cock the pistol; barrel bend
To cool the cutlets' seething grease,
To cope with Ay no more I dare,
To crush me with a just disdain.
To dire contentment shall give birth
To dominate her worthy lord,
To dream upon the sunny strand
To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
To ease the anguish of my breast.
To end with him her path below.To Love all ages lowly bend,
To fawn upon and love express;
To find in gossip such delight,
To flight before her radiant look,
To follow you in every place,
To foreign lands he would allude,
To freeze his finger hath begun,
To friendship making no pretence,
To guess how you the eve pull through."--
To happiness contributing.
To help her to the other shore
To her an elegy composed.
To his Penates now returned,
To idle musing was a prey;
To jest as he had done last eve,
To kiss the feet which I admired!
To labour in his sledge forgot,
To lawless love I should prefer--
To lay two covers secretly.
To light had brought them from their dust,
To listen to the rippling rill.
To listen to the words you speak,
To loiter there in idleness
To look on life as on a show,
To make wise men the idiot play
To male acquaintances he bows,
To many a noisy feast and fight,
To mark with a contemptuous smile.
To me he would his Olga give,
To mention the foregoing eve,
To move in fashionable life,
To mutter her concealed desire
To my old nurse alone peruse,
To our Tattiana conquering,
To part in amity with thee!
To pass the night at home hath gone.
To pass with reasonable men
To peer into the future tries.
To purest love he tuned his note
To raise a clamour and a din:
To raise his pistol to his eye,
To romp and play she ne'er would go:
To russify the foreign phrase
To say farewell, and fussed and fumed
To secrets of virgins,
To see aught--never mind meanwhile)
To see his Olga ere the fray--
To see you by our fireside stand,
To seek him out with bended head.
To shallow sentiment a slave!
To sigh and meditate alone:
To sketch myself that I have tried
To sketch ye in Albano's style.
To slay himself with blade or ball,
To standards in which we believe?
To stay the maid against her will.
To strike imagination serve.
To such--delightful to repel.
To swagger as the art of love,
To swathe her shoulders in the furs,
To take a hand at whist oft come:
To take this letter to O-- Well!
To the abandoned dwelling-place.
To the fair object of his dream,
To the impressions of our youth,
To the pianoforte he moves
To the sarcastic observation,
To the theatre he repairs
To the young girl he said adieu,
To the youth Eugene hurried now--
To this arrangement can be seen,
To thy decree my will I bend.
To treat the matter as a jest,
To two young oaks the coachman leads.
To understand by slow degrees
To vary for a few brief days.For two whole days it seemed a change
To visit Moscow in the season.
To visit, lovely maid, return,
To wander through the meadows still,
To watch with lovers' ecstasies,
To what malicious merriment,
To whisper comfort, love and hope?
To whom amongst the jealous throng
To whom are our misfortunes grief
"To whom is it to go, my sweet?
To whom we used to consecrate
To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
To whom your hearts were consecrate,--
To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
To write his forefathers to warn
To write in cantos twenty-five.I've thought well o'er the general plan,
To write of any other elf
To youthful Olga's beauty bright,
"To--?"--"Larina."--"Tattiana?"--"So.
To-day it is my turn to teach.
To-day, my friends, at any rate,
To-morrow Tania we will show,
To-morrow before break of day,
To-morrow just like yesterday.
Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
Together moments one or two
Together they returned, nor word
Together we have wandered o'er
Told me to ask you. Ere that date
Tome of "Malvina," and but three
Too much I'm given to intersperse,
Took aim--but as immediately
Torquato Tasso's strains I deem.
Tortured by pangs of wild regret,
Tranquil repose. Eugene alone
Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
Transfixed Oneguine mine doth stay.Is this the same Tattiana, say,
Transparent o'er the Neva beamed
Transported to our Russian clime.
Trembles at artificial shame.The shining pistols are uncased,
Trembles upon my lips from spite,--
Trembling he seeks the young princess--
Triquet arose, and for the bard
Triumphant by anticipation,
Triumphant with the answer come.
Troy's sages should in concert own
True friend, landlord benevolent,
Turned and replied as it behoved,
Turned to her and discordantly
'Twas built, the venerable pile,
'Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,
'Twas not the first time, I can tell
'Twas plain--an oaken floor ye scan,
"'Twas possible then, happiness--
'Twas then he loved the tangled grove
'Twas then in valleys lone, remote,
'Twas these he read and these alone
Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!
Twice in the year to fast were bound,
Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
Two dressed in uniform appear--
Two hearts perchance were desolate
Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
Two minutes they in silence spent,
Two pines have joined their tangled roots,
Two poles together glued by ice,
Two verses he could recollect
'Twould serve ye in an epigram--
Undeviating and insane
Undoubtedly, disdain alone
Undressed herself and went to bed
Unfavourable unto her.
Unhappily too salt by far;
Unknown as yet the aching heart,
Unknown to all he doth appear,
Unknown to all, without a tie,
Unless forbidden fruit we eat,
Unseen in thick and tangled grass
Unseen thou wast already dear.
Until her heart less high should bound--
Until her powers of running fail.She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
Until the sleepless Breguet chime
Unto Anicia for the keys
Unto a carping world must show--
Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
Unto her husband, went away--
Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
Unto his own Tattiana he,
Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell--
Unto the fields she makes her way,
Unto the gates the servants fly
Unto the hero of this lay
Unto the sounding sea to list,
Unto the windmill he must ride
Unto their solitude one day,
Up to the attic, and all need
Upon a bunch of lovage green;
Upon a soul inert and cloyed?--
Upon her brow sits wrath alone--And it may be a secret dread
Upon her cheek by adulation
Upon her elbow she reclines,
Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
Upon his couch insensibly;
Upon its damp opacity,
Upon my lake I love to float,
Upon my visions such intrude.Fresh aspirations I have known,
Upon the Don's broad pastures bred
Upon the ball-room's glassy floor
Upon the dreary northern snows,
Upon the earth a mist did lie
Upon the highway of the sea
Upon the meadows showering,
Upon the opening page ye find:
Upon the stage his weary glance.
Upon the tumbled sofa placed,
Upon the windows tracery,
Upon those margins she perceived
Upon those pages she descries
Upon your daughters keep an eye,
Upward in a thin stream inclines.
Urging your droshkies swift as air
Us from the world wherein we live.Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;
Use subterfuge, and thus his breast
Vanished his youthful years at last,
Variety of speech and vests,
Verses and tears et cetera.
Vexation? Vanity? or strove
Vice had due punishment awarded,
Vice in romance is glorified
Viewed them with not a little scorn,
Villages in the distance show
Virgins miraculous I see,
Virtue was with a bride rewarded.But now our minds are mystified
Visions, now sad, now grateful, long
"_Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,
Vladimir Lenski visited
Vladimir Lenski was his name,
Vladimir closes up his book,
Vladimir something curtly said
Vladimir's property, a man
Vociferously paid her court,
Voices and hands applaud, and she
Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
Vows matrimonial to break,
Wafted upon poetic wing,
Waiting his coming--his alone!
Walking? The landscape tires the eye
Wallow, my friends, in company!
"Warm yourself here a little space!"
Warmth I imagined in your glance,
Was a delightful little spot,
Was born beside the Neva, where
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was certainly not erudite
Was drawn, ideal of my lay--
Was famous for thick-headedness.Lenski that eve in thought immersed,
Was he in health and void of care?--Even so! His passions soon abated,
Was it not so?--for thee I gave,
Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
Was it not thou, O vision bright,
Was not surprised thereby at all.
Was nothing but the British spleen
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Was sleeping then a sleep like death;
Was that which we are wont to call
Was the first question Olga made,
Was the meek love a maiden feels.
Was the old and forgotten coach;
Was the sad poet filled with gloom,
Was uttered, and the cabin shook--
Was with himself dissatisfied.In fact, the subject analysed,
Was withered ere the morning light--
Was wont with me at cards to play.
Was worthy of that old baboon,
Was younger than myself, my light,
We Russians, friends from distant parts
We all of us of education
We are the first who such a name
We called to mind our youthful days--
We glide along a floor of wax.
We hear with interest intense
We must admit but little taste
"We never loved in days of old,
We visit about Christmas Day,
Wearied of leisure in the end,
Weeping they loosed my tresses long
Well known unto Oneguine mine.
Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.In cruel solitude each day
Well! Larina appears to us
Well! just as she was yesterday."Why did you leave last night so soon?"
"Well!"--"I the elder should prefer,
Were I like you a bard by trade--
Were stripped with melancholy sound,
Were to analysis subjected.
Were you in love when you were young?"--"Alack! Tattiana," she replied,
Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
What I by relatives conceive?
What a storm of emotions keen
What acrimonious scorn I trace
What agitation languidly
"What ails thee, dear?"--"I feel depressed.
"What ails thee?"--"Nothing."--He is fled.At home arriving he addressed
What are they? Gladly would I yield
What bitter tears with thee I shed!
What boots it with the age to strive?
"What can be done? She is no child!"
"What can be drearier than the house,
What do I ask? What cause assigned
What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,
What doth she see? Around the board
What everybody long has known;
What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?
What is his latest character?
What is thy cleverness to me?
"What is your name?" The boor looked dazed,
What jokes and guesses now abound,
What languor would his silence show,
What more's required? The world replies,
What never was remarked or heard
What once I knew is clean forgot--
What pleasures Hymen would prepare
What sad emotions o'er me steal
What say you? to the family--
What they in conversation said?--
What visions then her fancy thronged--
What will the coming dawn reveal?
"What! Grandison?"--"Yes, certainly!"
What! really going? 'Tis too bad!
What, invitations? The same day
When Eugene like a ghost did rise
When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
When I yon semicircle bright
When Passion's fire no longer glows
When all around the entrance pressed,
When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
When captured in a schoolboy's cap;
When deaf and silent he doth lie
When evening o'er the landscape looms,
When first upon my cheek I feel
When harsh demeanour hath consigned
When he in ardent verse portrays
When hope's delightful flower but bloomed
When in as instant she is lost,--
When in her walks abroad she met
When in simplicity ye wrote
When in that company she saw
When in the grand saloon was heard
When in the study's calm retreat,
When motionless your gaze beneath
When o'er a glass with friends we prate
When on the pallid eastern sky
When people with long countenance
When poets lachrymose recite
When separation's hour drew nigh,
When shall I wing my passage free
When tea was brought. 'Tis my delight
When that time comes, a poem I'll strive
When the hour came to bid good-bye--
When the mazurka used to peal,
When the obedient doll in sport
When the same life before him lies
When the sonorous Breguet tells
When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
When to enlarge we shall succeed,
When will my hour of freedom come!
When will the devil take his own!"
When youth's rebellious hour drew near
When, sitting by his fire alone
Whene'er a brilliant courtly dame
Whene'er across the plain at speed
Whene'er he had an aching head;
Where God alone knows whom she met.
Where I can no more recollect?--
Where Nereids murmur evermore,
Where all upon the surface lies,--
Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
Where better?
Where dwelt the Muses' worshipper,
Where each young critic ready stands,
Where every day before his eyes
Where fashionable circles meet
Where harsh frivolity proclaims
Where in the country Eugene yet,
Where is he who doth not deceive?
Where is the outlaw, banned by men,
Where long time he in solitude
        Where man is not.
Where many another hand had signed
Where melancholy rocks arise
Where my days in the wilderness
Where plentifully feelings flow
Where shining runs the tiny brook,
Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
Where the first time I saw your face,--
Where the first time she met with _him_.Thus widely meditation erred,
Where thine equal shall we find?
Where turmoil cannot penetrate,
Where youth ?
Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?
Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!
Where--"--"What! another eclogue spin?
Wherefore am I your quarry held?--
Wherefore? She found a secret joy
Wherein I buried left my heart.
Wherein I castigation get;
Wherein I felt love's fatal dart,
Wherein a space Oneguine spent.
Wherein love innocently pines.
Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie
Wherein the child of fashion strict
Wherein the heart its vows expressed,
Wherein the miserable wife
Wherein we lately left the twain.
Whereto in language courteous
Which 'neath her pillow lay till morn.
Which Autumn late to earth consigned,
Which Ovid once immortalized,
Which afterwards the muse revived.
Which all her darling friends have scrawled
Which crushing dignity must brook!
Which falls in starry flakes below.How in the country pass this time?
Which from the devil's bookcase start,
Which glowed with virginal desire.When but a boy he Olga loved
Which in a hilly neighbourhood
Which in the elevated sphere
Which in the winter were a joy:
Which in your spirit dominates,
Which is he? or an imitation,
Which lessons unto us repeat,
Which might for many ages last.Surely ye all have overhauled
Which never have existed, e'en
Which o'er the waters boldly leap,
Which of approaching labour tells
Which rankled in Tattiana's breast,
Which rushed in eager dense array
Which shines with iridescent hues.
Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
Which we experienced long ago.Alas! he loved as in our times
Which your true friend with a sweet smile
Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,
Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
Whilst all creation seemed to dream
Whilst cheerily the embers shone,
Whilst from her countenance ne'er stirred
Whilst he "belle Nina" had the face
Whilst homeward by the nearest route
Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet
Whilst struggling for the heritage.Soon Olga's accents shrill resound
Whilst the fond parents, friends thro' life,
Whilst the tired serving-men without
Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
White Moscow raises her old spires,
Whither along them doth he pelt?Oneguine whither gallops? Ye
Whither and wherefore do I speed
Whither at headlong speed doth go
Whither departed is the host?
Whither shall he go first? He'll see,
Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
Whither that evening he will go.
Whither two neighbouring dames have walked
Who arrived lately from Tamboff,
Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
Who by a haughty word or glance
Who can help loving mother Moscow?
Who cannot conjure former joys?
Who dreams expound and prophecies.Brought by a pedlar vagabond
Who dressing-gown and slippers gives
Who early died a gallant death_,"
Who every gesture, every phrase
Who floats contentedly through life,
Who following Petrarch move along
Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
Who from two years to thirty tell;
Who glory, wealth and dignities
Who had for four long years survived
Who in the agony of grief
Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
_Who in thy love finds more delight
Who knows? with love's consuming flame
Who labours hard to humour us?
Who may he be? Is it Eugene?
Who now could fail to recognize
Who reads his visionary theme
Who secretly denounced the gift,
Who selfishly unmoved remain
Who the romance do not complete,
Who this soft nonsense could impart,
Who thrives this moment as I write,
Who to surrender did not blench
Who to the youthful hostess bowed,
Who tyrannizes us with ease,
Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
"Who will be there?"--"The family.
Who with a scuffle and a shout
Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?"--
Who without more prevarication
Who words and actions will adjust
"Who would have thought it? As of yore!
Who would the maiden innocent
Who, heard the music of my lay,
"Who? Is it that stout general, pray?"--Let us congratulations pay
Wholly beside herself with fear,
Whom autocratic fate's decrees
Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
Whom jealous transport cannot move,
Whom latterly one often meets
Whom pale Diana's ray illumes--
Whom thirty centuries adore.I will with thy divinity
Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
Whom you in slumber may have seen."But she, her sister never heeding,
Whom, as the custom is of men,
Whose author nature understood
Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
Whose countless golden crosses glow
Whose glance reflecting inspiration
Whose hands indulgently caress
Whose heart experience icy made
Whose hearts responsive have remained
Whose memories make the heart beat quick
Whose memory doth not refuse
Whose qualities appeared to afford
Whose tones Apollo's sons inspire,
Why did you visit our poor place?
"Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
Will be absorbed by Lethe's stream;
Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
Will happiness replace. My God!
Will he pursue?--But no one came.
Will not five centuries exceed
Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
Will pass; the same to-morrow try--
Will sound an insult in your ear.
Will teach grammatical conceits,
Will to the old times faithful be.Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
Will you?"--"Agreed."--"I thank you, friend,"
Winter resigned her empire white,
Winter! The peasant blithely goes
Winter's approach she doth not hail
With "vale" finish off a note;
With Eugene pranks of former years
With Martin Zadeka. In woe
With Olga; nor of this appeared
With Ozeroff was wont to share
With affectation,--nothing more.
With all dissatisfaction shows.
With all their progeny were there,
With an imagination wild,
With ardent sighs and flattery
With bated breath, around she bends
With better half as cumbersome;
With bitter tears my mother prayed,
With blessings on the ditches and
With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
With blunted pencil-point adorns.
With boiling torrent dark and gray;
With book in hand reclined in bed,
With cherries, red currants,
With childlike lisp will lie to please.
With clouded brow stands silently?
With dance and with song.
With deeper woe than others' grief.
With effort she restrains. Well nigh
With epigrams impertinent,
With eye precise and without fail.
With fir-trees standing motionless
With flame more ardent passion burns,
With folded arms and eyes bent low,
With footsteps tremulous with awe
With gay design and silken stitch.
With great delight.--O God on high!
With her they did associate,
With him were friends eternally:
With his exasperated sense,
With his ferocious mate appears.
With his own pawn alas! his rook!Homeward returning, he at home
With hisses Cleopatra scares,
With hope and then perplexity,
With hopeless passion: from her bed
With humble prose I'll fill my page
With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
With inexact pronunciation
With intellect and strong volition
With intellect, a taste refined,
With iridescent wing doth flap
With it may be a couple more;
With its exhilarating flow,
With jealous fear, anxiety.
With jealous fire resuscitate,
With jest and gossip gaily blent.
With late repentance gnaws and stings.
With laughter smothered weariness:
With lengthened howl and accent loud,
With little knowledge and that wrong
With loud explosion, the bright wine
With love which happiness extends;
With lovers' rubbish filled, was neat
With many a snare their pathway line!
With many a vacancy, 'tis said."--
With me Caucasian rocks beside!
With measured step and even gait
With mute appeal to ask they seem--
With one foot resting on its tip
With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
With our Oneguine doth aspire
With pallid light, but Eugene lay
With pungent or obtuse retort,
With purple hand Aurora leads,
With quite a lachrymose expression
With rapturous longing he awaits,
With raspberries, cherries.
With roses, caps and looks malign;
With sad refrain misfortune near.
With satisfaction marvellous,
With scandal's trivial ornament.
With serious air then went away
With shame I shudder and with dread--
With so much warmth and intellect?
With spiritual tenderness;
With such a perversity proclaim.
With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
With taffety instead of crape.Having abjured the haunts of men,
With tears which secret sufferers love--
With tears, confused emotions, bliss,--With unanimity complete,
With tenderness hath recognized
With the "Well-Wisher" in her hand!
With the epistle of my fair;
With thee I conversed when I bore
With this immoderate request
With this unpleasant _tete-a-tete_,
With thoughts of a far distant land,
With tranquil air Oneguine leads
With tumult or contentment still
With us 'tis quite a novelty
With us is easily attained.
With what avidity and zest
With which blind Fortune oft betrays
With words of foreign origin
With worldly honours, it may be,
Within her; she is sick at heart;
Within his memory there lay,
Within his mind Tattiana bore,
Within his sledge the stiffened corse,
Within its wave the sounding pail,
Within my memory I bore
Within resounded shriek and shout:
Within that secret court discussed,
Without a chance to slip away.
Without amaze or wrath displayed:
Without constraint in conversation
Without disguise ourselves explain.
Without disgust we look upon?Happy he who in youth was young,
Without enthusiasm he met
Without grammatical mistakes.
Without participation hears,
Without profession, business, wife,
Without the faintest trace to leave
Without the ken of parents both,
Without the least constraint he bowed.
Without them Eugene is complete;
Would agitate a mystic wreath
Would at the proper time appear.How well he played the greenhorn's part
Would haste in agitation dire
Would loiter by the looking-glass,
Would lose his slippers or gazette.Time flies! a genial air abroad,
Would once in powdered wig appear;
Would she in silence long remain.Contemplativeness, her delight,
Would she the canvas tight enrich
Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
Would whisper: shall I so long live?"--
Would you to me this Phyllis show,
Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
Wrapt in oblivion complete,
Writ in my honour now and then--
Yawning betook him to a pen.
Ye billows of blue Hadria's sea,
Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?Perchance to benefit mankind,
Ye feel but little interest,
Ye golden days of my young spring?
Ye groves whose depths I know so well,
Ye men of fashion cynical,
Ye mothers also, caution use,
Ye need dissimulation base
"Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!
Ye shadows of a life more high,
Ye well-known mountain summits high,
Yea! although rendered beauteous
Yea! and a man of honour, lo!
Years have inclined me to stern prose,
Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,
Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,
Yes! every one must have his foes,
Yes! for our unpretending home,
Yes, happy--though she at his side
Yet I in idleness expend
Yet as a rule their talk I call
Yet clearer shines than every light
Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,
Yet let us part in friendship, O
Yet neither Virgil nor Racine
Yet satiated with success,
Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
Yet sometimes pages two or three
Yet sometimes this or that deceit
Yet still apparently aspire
Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
Yet still remains the old despair.
Yet suffering emotional
Yet viewing her from head to foot,
Yet was her inmost soul o'erjoyed
Yet with a feigned frigidity
Yon silly moon upon the brink
Yonder the household lad doth run,
You choose."--"But who is she?"--"My wife.""So thou art wed! I did not know.
You fall in love again. But still--
"You have a letter to me sent.
You in the least commiserate
You know that I am now a fool--
You never since your nose have shown.
You never would have heard the name,
You o'er your wine insulted hath--
You will not all abandon me.
You with stern countenance declare
You'll find her portrait there, I vouch;
You'll spend your winter famously!
You, he a noble mind disclosed,
Young ladies in a vasty curve,
Young ladies' faces and their feet.
Young ladies, if ye ever strove
Your conversation cold and hard,
"Your fashionable world I hate,
Your frankness I shall compensate
Your heart possesses, I know well,
Your innocent and charming note
Your magic voices I shall greet,
"Your second you have left behind!"
Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,
Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
Youth freshens beneath Passion's showers,
Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot
Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,
Zaretski paces thirty-two
Zaretski rose, nor would explain,
Zaretski shouted: "Why, he's killed!"--
Zaretski with a knowing grin,
Zaretski, once a bully bold,
Zaretski, village mechanician,
Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,



"My uncle's goodness is extreme,
If seriously he hath disease;
He hath acquired the world's esteem
And nothing more important sees;
A paragon of virtue he!
But what a nuisance it will be,
Chained to his bedside night and day
Without a chance to slip away.
Ye need dissimulation base
A dying man with art to soothe,
Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
And physic bring with mournful face,
To sigh and meditate alone:
When will the devil take his own!"
Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
By the decree of Mighty Jove,
Inheritor of all his race.
Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,
Let me present ye to the man,
Who without more prevarication
The hero is of my narration!
Oneguine, O my gentle readers,
Was born beside the Neva, where
It may be ye were born, or there
Have shone as one of fashion's leaders.
I also wandered there of old,
But cannot stand the northern cold.
Having performed his service truly,
Deep into debt his father ran;
Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
At last became a ruined man.
But Eugene was by fate preserved,
For first "madame" his wants observed,
And then "monsieur" supplied her place;
The boy was wild but full of grace.
"Monsieur l'Abbe" a starving Gaul,
Fearing his pupil to annoy,
Instructed jestingly the boy,
Morality taught scarce at all;
Gently for pranks he would reprove
And in the Summer Garden rove.
When youth's rebellious hour drew near
And my Eugene the path must trace--
The path of hope and tender fear--
Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
Lo! my Oneguine free as air,
Cropped in the latest style his hair,
Dressed like a London dandy he
The giddy world at last shall see.
He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
In the French language perfectly,
Danced the mazurka gracefully,
Without the least constraint he bowed.
What more's required? The world replies,
He is a charming youth and wise.
We all of us of education
A something somehow have obtained,
Thus, praised be God! a reputation
With us is easily attained.
Oneguine was--so many deemed,
Pedantic although scholar like,
In truth he had the happy trick
Without constraint in conversation
Of touching lightly every theme.
Silent, oracular ye'd see him
Amid a serious disputation,
Then suddenly discharge a joke
The ladies' laughter to provoke.
Latin is just now not in vogue,
But if the truth I must relate,
Oneguine knew enough, the rogue
A mild quotation to translate,
A little Juvenal to spout,
With "vale" finish off a note;
Two verses he could recollect
Of the AEneid, but incorrect.
In history he took no pleasure,
The dusty chronicles of earth
For him were but of little worth,
Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
Within his memory there lay,
From Romulus unto our day.
For empty sound the rascal swore he
Existence would not make a curse,
Knew not an iamb from a choree,
Although we read him heaps of verse.
Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
But Adam Smith to read appeared,
And at economy was great;
That is, he could elucidate
How empires store of wealth unfold,
How flourish, why and wherefore less
If the raw product they possess
The medium is required of gold.
The father scarcely understands
His son and mortgages his lands.
But upon all that Eugene knew
I have no leisure here to dwell,
But say he was a genius who
In one thing really did excel.
It occupied him from a boy,
A labour, torment, yet a joy,
It whiled his idle hours away
And wholly occupied his day--
The amatory science warm,
Which Ovid once immortalized,
For which the poet agonized
Laid down his life of sun and storm
On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
Far from his Italy--his own.
How soon he learnt deception's art,
Hope to conceal and jealousy,
False confidence or doubt to impart,
Sombre or glad in turn to be,
Haughty appear, subservient,
Obsequious or indifferent!
What languor would his silence show,
How full of fire his speech would glow!
How artless was the note which spoke
Of love again, and yet again;
How deftly could he transport feign!
How bright and tender was his look,
Modest yet daring! And a tear
Would at the proper time appear.How well he played the greenhorn's part
To cheat the inexperienced fair,
Sometimes by pleasing flattery's art,
Sometimes by ready-made despair;
The feeble moment would espy
Of tender years the modesty
Conquer by passion and address,
Await the long-delayed caress.
Avowal then 'twas time to pray,
Attentive to the heart's first beating,
Follow up love--a secret meeting
Arrange without the least delay--
Then, then--well, in some solitude
Lessons to give he understood!How soon he learnt to titillate
The heart of the inveterate flirt!
Desirous to annihilate
His own antagonists expert,
How bitterly he would malign,
With many a snare their pathway line!
But ye, O happy husbands, ye
With him were friends eternally:
The crafty spouse caressed him, who
By Faublas in his youth was schooled,
And the suspicious veteran old,
The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
Who floats contentedly through life,
Proud of his dinners and his wife!
One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
His valet brings him letters three.
What, invitations? The same day
As many entertainments be!
A ball here, there a children's treat,
Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
Whither shall he go first? He'll see,
Perchance he will to all the three.
Meantime in matutinal dress
And hat surnamed a "Bolivar"
He hies unto the "Boulevard,"
To loiter there in idleness
Until the sleepless Breguet chime
Announcing to him dinner-time.
'Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
"Drive on!" the cheerful cry goes forth,
His furs are powdered on the way
By the fine silver of the north.
He bends his course to Talon's, where
He knows Kaverine will repair.
He enters. High the cork arose
And Comet champagne foaming flows.
Before him red roast beef is seen
And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
And Limburg cheese alive and old
Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
To cool the cutlets' seething grease,
When the sonorous Breguet tells
Of the commencement of the piece.
A critic of the stage malicious,
A slave of actresses capricious,
Oneguine was a citizen
Of the domains of the side-scene.
To the theatre he repairs
Where each young critic ready stands,
Capers applauds with clap of hands,
With hisses Cleopatra scares,
Moina recalls for this alone
That all may hear his voice's tone.Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
Shone pungent Satire's dauntless king,
Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
The young Simeonova too there
With Ozeroff was wont to share
Applause, the people's donative.
There our Katenine did revive
Corneille's majestic genius,
Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
His comedies, a noisy rout,
There Didelot became glorious,
There, there, beneath the side-scene's shade
The drama of my youth was played.
My goddesses, where are your shades?
Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
Are ye replaced by other maids
Who cannot conjure former joys?
Shall I your chorus hear anew,
Russia's Terpsichore review
Again in her ethereal dance?
Or will my melancholy glance
On the dull stage find all things changed,
The disenchanted glass direct
Where I can no more recollect?--
A careless looker-on estranged
In silence shall I sit and yawn
And dream of life's delightful dawn?The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
Impatiently the gallery stamps,
The curtain now they slowly raise.
Obedient to the magic strings,
Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
Istomina the nimbly-bounding;
With one foot resting on its tip
Slow circling round its fellow swings
And now she skips and now she springs
Like down from Aeolus's lip,
Now her lithe form she arches o'er
And beats with rapid foot the floor.
Shouts of applause! Oneguine passes
Between the stalls, along the toes;
Seated, a curious look with glasses
On unknown female forms he throws.
Free scope he yields unto his glance,
Reviews both dress and countenance,
With all dissatisfaction shows.
To male acquaintances he bows,
And finally he deigns let fall
Upon the stage his weary glance.
He yawns, averts his countenance,
Exclaiming, "We must change 'em all!
I long by ballets have been bored,
Now Didelot scarce can be endured!"Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
Across the stage still madly sweep,
Whilst the tired serving-men without
Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
Still everywhere, without, within,
The lamps illuminating shine;
The steed benumbed still pawing stands
And of the irksome harness tires,
And still the coachmen round the fires
Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
But Eugene long hath left the press
To array himself in evening dress.
Faithfully shall I now depict,
Portray the solitary den
Wherein the child of fashion strict
Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
All that industrial London brings
For tallow, wood and other things
Across the Baltic's salt sea waves,
All which caprice and affluence craves,
All which in Paris eager taste,
Choosing a profitable trade,
For our amusement ever made
And ease and fashionable waste,--
Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
Philosopher just turned eighteen.China and bronze the tables weight,
Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
And, joy of souls effeminate,
Phials of crystal scents enclose.
Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
Scissors both straight and curved as well,
Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
Both for the nails and for the tushes.
Rousseau, I would remark in passing,
Could not conceive how serious Grimm
Dared calmly cleanse his nails 'fore him,
Eloquent raver all-surpassing,--
The friend of liberty and laws
In this case quite mistaken was.
The most industrious man alive
May yet be studious of his nails;
What boots it with the age to strive?
Custom the despot soon prevails.
A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
Dreading the world's remarks malign,
Was that which we are wont to call
A fop, in dress pedantical.
Three mortal hours per diem he
Would loiter by the looking-glass,
And from his dressing-room would pass
Like Venus when, capriciously,
The goddess would a masquerade
Attend in male attire arrayed.On this artistical retreat
Having once fixed your interest,
I might to connoisseurs repeat
The style in which my hero dressed;
Though I confess I hardly dare
Describe in detail the affair,
Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
To Russ indigenous are not;
And also that my feeble verse--
Pardon I ask for such a sin--
With words of foreign origin
Too much I'm given to intersperse,
Though to the Academy I come
And oft its Dictionary thumb.
But such is not my project now,
So let us to the ball-room haste,
Whither at headlong speed doth go
Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
Past darkened windows and long streets
Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
Till carriage lamps, a double row,
Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
Which shines with iridescent hues.
He nears a spacious mansion's gate,
By many a lamp illuminate,
And through the lofty windows views
Profiles of lovely dames he knows
And also fashionable beaux.Our hero stops and doth alight,
Flies past the porter to the stair,
But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
He enters: in the hall a crowd,
No more the music thunders loud,
Some a mazurka occupies,
Crushing and a confusing noise;
Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
The feet of graceful ladies fly,
And following them ye might espy
Full many a glance like lightning flash,
And by the fiddle's rushing sound
The voice of jealousy is drowned.In my young days of wild delight
On balls I madly used to dote,
Fond declarations they invite
Or the delivery of a note.
So hearken, every worthy spouse,
I would your vigilance arouse,
Attentive be unto my rhymes
And due precautions take betimes.
Ye mothers also, caution use,
Upon your daughters keep an eye,
Employ your glasses constantly,
For otherwise--God only knows!
I lift a warning voice because
I long have ceased to offend the laws.Alas! life's hours which swiftly fly
I've wasted in amusements vain,
But were it not immoral I
Should dearly like a dance again.
I love its furious delight,
The crowd and merriment and light,
The ladies, their fantastic dress,
Also their feet--yet ne'ertheless
Scarcely in Russia can ye find
Three pairs of handsome female feet;
Ah! I still struggle to forget
A pair; though desolate my mind,
Their memory lingers still and seems
To agitate me in my dreams.When, where, and in what desert land,
Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
No trace ye left in passing by
Upon the dreary northern snows,
But better loved the soft repose
Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
I once forgot for your sweet cause
The thirst for fame and man's applause,
My country and an exile's lot;
My joy in youth was fleeting e'en
As your light footprints on the green.Diana's bosom, Flora's cheeks,
Are admirable, my dear friend,
But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
Charms more enduring in the end.
For promises her feet reveal
Of untold gain she must conceal,
Their privileged allurements fire
A hidden train of wild desire.
I love them, O my dear Elvine,
Beneath the table-cloth of white,
In winter on the fender bright,
In springtime on the meadows green,
Upon the ball-room's glassy floor
Or by the ocean's rocky shore.
Beside the stormy sea one day
I envied sore the billows tall,
Which rushed in eager dense array
Enamoured at her feet to fall.
How like the billow I desired
To kiss the feet which I admired!
No, never in the early blaze
Of fiery youth's untutored days
So ardently did I desire
A young Armida's lips to press,
Her cheek of rosy loveliness
Or bosom full of languid fire,--
A gust of passion never tore
My spirit with such pangs before.Another time, so willed it Fate,
Immersed in secret thought I stand
And grasp a stirrup fortunate--
Her foot was in my other hand.
Again imagination blazed,
The contact of the foot I raised
Rekindled in my withered heart
The fires of passion and its smart--
Away! and cease to ring their praise
For ever with thy tattling lyre,
The proud ones are not worth the fire
Of passion they so often raise.
The words and looks of charmers sweet
Are oft deceptive--like their feet.Where is Oneguine? Half asleep,
Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
The drum already doth arouse.
The shopman and the pedlar rise
And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,
Crunching the morning snow she treads;
Morning awakes with joyous sound;
The shutters open; to the skies
In column blue the smoke doth rise;
The German baker looks around
His shop, a night-cap on his head,
And pauses oft to serve out bread.
But turning morning into night,
Tired by the ball's incessant noise,
The votary of vain delight
Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
Late in the afternoon to rise,
When the same life before him lies
Till morn--life uniform but gay,
To-morrow just like yesterday.
But was our friend Eugene content,
Free, in the blossom of his spring,
Amidst successes flattering
And pleasure's daily blandishment,
Or vainly 'mid luxurious fare
Was he in health and void of care?--Even so! His passions soon abated,
Hateful the hollow world became,
Nor long his mind was agitated
By love's inevitable flame.
For treachery had done its worst;
Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
Because he could not gourmandise
Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
And irrigate them with champagne;
Nor slander viciously could spread
Whene'er he had an aching head;
And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
He finally lost all delight
In bullets, sabres, and in fight.His malady, whose cause I ween
It now to investigate is time,
Was nothing but the British spleen
Transported to our Russian clime.
It gradually possessed his mind;
Though, God be praised! he ne'er designed
To slay himself with blade or ball,
Indifferent he became to all,
And like Childe Harold gloomily
He to the festival repairs,
Nor boston nor the world's affairs
Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
Impressed him in the least degree,--
Callous to all he seemed to be.Ye miracles of courtly grace,
He left _you_ first, and I must own
The manners of the highest class
Have latterly vexatious grown;
And though perchance a lady may
Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
Yet as a rule their talk I call
Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
Then they're so innocent of vice,
So full of piety, correct,
So prudent, and so circumspect
Stately, devoid of prejudice,
So inaccessible to men,
Their looks alone produce the spleen.
And you, my youthful damsels fair,
Whom latterly one often meets
Urging your droshkies swift as air
Along Saint Petersburg's paved streets,
From you too Eugene took to flight,
Abandoning insane delight,
And isolated from all men,
Yawning betook him to a pen.
He thought to write, but labour long
Inspired him with disgust and so
Nought from his pen did ever flow,
And thus he never fell among
That vicious set whom I don't blame--
Because a member I became.Once more to idleness consigned,
He felt the laudable desire
From mere vacuity of mind
The wit of others to acquire.
A case of books he doth obtain--
He reads at random, reads in vain.
This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
This wicked, that absurd he deems,
All are constrained and fetters bear,
Antiquity no pleasure gave,
The moderns of the ancients rave--
Books he abandoned like the fair,
His book-shelf instantly doth drape
With taffety instead of crape.Having abjured the haunts of men,
Like him renouncing vanity,
His friendship I acquired just then;
His character attracted me.
An innate love of meditation,
Original imagination,
And cool sagacious mind he had:
I was incensed and he was sad.
Both were of passion satiate
And both of dull existence tired,
Extinct the flame which once had fired;
Both were expectant of the hate
With which blind Fortune oft betrays
The very morning of our days.He who hath lived and living, thinks,
Must e'en despise his kind at last;
He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
From shades of the relentless past.
No fond illusions live to soothe,
But memory like a serpent's tooth
With late repentance gnaws and stings.
All this in many cases brings
A charm with it in conversation.
Oneguine's speeches I abhorred
At first, but soon became inured
To the sarcastic observation,
To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
And gloomy epigrams malicious.How oft, when on a summer night
Transparent o'er the Neva beamed
The firmament in mellow light,
And when the watery mirror gleamed
No more with pale Diana's rays,
We called to mind our youthful days--
The days of love and of romance!
Then would we muse as in a trance,
Impressionable for an hour,
And breathe the balmy breath of night;
And like the prisoner's our delight
Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
As on the rapid wings of thought
The early days of life we sought.
Absorbed in melancholy mood
And o'er the granite coping bent,
Oneguine meditative stood,
E'en as the poet says he leant.
'Tis silent all! Alone the cries
Of the night sentinels arise
And from the Millionaya afar
The sudden rattling of a car.
Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
A boat with splashing oar floats by,
And now we hear delightedly
A jolly song and distant horn;
But sweeter in a midnight dream
Torquato Tasso's strains I deem.
Ye billows of blue Hadria's sea,
O Brenta, once more we shall meet
And, inspiration firing me,
Your magic voices I shall greet,
Whose tones Apollo's sons inspire,
And after Albion's proud lyre
Possess my love and sympathy.
The nights of golden Italy
I'll pass beneath the firmament,
Hid in the gondola's dark shade,
Alone with my Venetian maid,
Now talkative, now reticent;
From her my lips shall learn the tongue
Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
When will my hour of freedom come!
Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
Awaiting on the shore I roam
And beckon to the passing sails.
Upon the highway of the sea
When shall I wing my passage free
On waves by tempests curdled o'er!
'Tis time to quit this weary shore
So uncongenial to my mind,
To dream upon the sunny strand
Of Africa, ancestral land,
Of dreary Russia left behind,
Wherein I felt love's fatal dart,
Wherein I buried left my heart.
Eugene designed with me to start
And visit many a foreign clime,
But Fortune cast our lots apart
For a protracted space of time.
Just at that time his father died,
And soon Oneguine's door beside
Of creditors a hungry rout
Their claims and explanations shout.
But Eugene, hating litigation
And with his lot in life content,
To a surrender gave consent,
Seeing in this no deprivation,
Or counting on his uncle's death
And what the old man might bequeath.And in reality one day
The steward sent a note to tell
How sick to death his uncle lay
And wished to say to him farewell.
Having this mournful document
Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
And hastened to his uncle's side,
But in his heart dissatisfied,
Having for money's sake alone
Sorrow to counterfeit and wail--
Thus we began our little tale--
But, to his uncle's mansion flown,
He found him on the table laid,
A due which must to earth be paid.The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
And from the country all around
Had come both friends and enemies--
Funeral amateurs abound!
The body they consigned to rest,
And then made merry pope and guest,
With serious air then went away
As men who much had done that day.
Lo! my Oneguine rural lord!
Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
He now a full possession takes,
He who economy abhorred,
Delighted much his former ways
To vary for a few brief days.For two whole days it seemed a change
To wander through the meadows still,
The cool dark oaken grove to range,
To listen to the rippling rill.
But on the third of grove and mead
He took no more the slightest heed;
They made him feel inclined to doze;
And the conviction soon arose,
Ennui can in the country dwell
Though without palaces and streets,
Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fetes;
On him spleen mounted sentinel
And like his shadow dogged his life,
Or better,--like a faithful wife.I was for calm existence made,
For rural solitude and dreams,
My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
And more imagination teems.
On innocent delights I dote,
Upon my lake I love to float,
For law I _far niente_ take
And every morning I awake
The child of sloth and liberty.
I slumber much, a little read,
Of fleeting glory take no heed.
In former years thus did not I
In idleness and tranquil joy
The happiest days of life employ?Love, flowers, the country, idleness
And fields my joys have ever been;
I like the difference to express
Between myself and my Eugene,
Lest the malicious reader or
Some one or other editor
Of keen sarcastic intellect
Herein my portrait should detect,
And impiously should declare,
To sketch myself that I have tried
Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
As if impossible it were
To write of any other elf
Than one's own fascinating self.Here I remark all poets are
Love to idealize inclined;
I have dreamed many a vision fair
And the recesses of my mind
Retained the image, though short-lived,
Which afterwards the muse revived.
Thus carelessly I once portrayed
Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
The captives of the Salguir's shore.
But now a question in this wise
Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
To whom amongst the jealous throng
Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
Whose glance reflecting inspiration
With tenderness hath recognized
Thy meditative incantation--
Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
None, be my witness Heaven above!
The malady of hopeless love
I have endured without respite.
Happy who thereto can unite
Poetic transport. They impart
A double force unto their song
Who following Petrarch move along
And ease the tortures of the heart--
Perchance they laurels also cull--
But I, in love, was mute and dull.The Muse appeared, when love passed by
And my dark soul to light was brought;
Free, I renewed the idolatry
Of harmony enshrining thought.
I write, and anguish flies away,
Nor doth my absent pen portray
Around my stanzas incomplete
Young ladies' faces and their feet.
Extinguished ashes do not blaze--
I mourn, but tears I cannot shed--
Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
Time will the ravages efface--
When that time comes, a poem I'll strive
To write in cantos twenty-five.I've thought well o'er the general plan,
The hero's name too in advance,
Meantime I'll finish whilst I can
Canto the First of this romance.
I've scanned it with a jealous eye,
Discovered much absurdity,
But will not modify a tittle--
I owe the censorship a little.
For journalistic deglutition
I yield the fruit of work severe.
Go, on the Neva's bank appear,
My very latest composition!
Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows--
Misunderstanding, words and blows.
The PoetCanto The SecondThe village wherein yawned Eugene
Was a delightful little spot,
There friends of pure delight had been
Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
The lonely mansion-house to screen
From gales a hill behind was seen;
Before it ran a stream. Behold!
Afar, where clothed in green and gold
Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
Villages in the distance show
And herds of oxen wandering low;
Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
A thick immense neglected grove
Extended--haunt which Dryads love.
'Twas built, the venerable pile,
As lordly mansions ought to be,
In solid, unpretentious style,
The style of wise antiquity.
Lofty the chambers one and all,
Silk tapestry upon the wall,
Imperial portraits hang around
And stoves of various shapes abound.
All this I know is out of date,
I cannot tell the reason why,
But Eugene, incontestably,
The matter did not agitate,
Because he yawned at the bare view
Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
He took the room wherein the old
Man--forty years long in this wise--
His housekeeper was wont to scold,
Look through the window and kill flies.
'Twas plain--an oaken floor ye scan,
Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
And not a speck of dirt descried.
Oneguine oped the cupboards wide.
In one he doth accounts behold,
Here bottles stand in close array,
There jars of cider block the way,
An almanac but eight years old.
His uncle, busy man indeed,
No other book had time to read.
Alone amid possessions great,
Eugene at first began to dream,
If but to lighten Time's dull rate,
Of many an economic scheme;
This anchorite amid his waste
The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
By an _obrok's_ indulgent rate:
The peasant blessed his happy fate.
But this a heinous crime appeared
Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
Who secretly denounced the gift,
And many another slily sneered;
And all with one accord agreed,
He was a dangerous fool indeed.
All visited him at first, of course;
But since to the backdoor they led
Most usually a Cossack horse
Upon the Don's broad pastures bred
If they but heard domestic loads
Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
Most by this circumstance offended
All overtures of friendship ended.
"Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
He's a freemason, so we think.
Alone he doth his claret drink,
A lady's hand doth never kiss.
'Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_"
This was his social character.
Into the district then to boot
A new proprietor arrived,
From whose analysis minute
The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
Vladimir Lenski was his name,
From Gottingen inspired he came,
A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
A young and handsome galliard.
He brought from mystic Germany
The fruits of learning and combined
A fiery and eccentric mind,
Idolatry of liberty,
A wild enthusiastic tongue,
Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
The pervert world with icy chill
Had not yet withered his young breast.
His heart reciprocated still
When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
He was a dear delightful fool--
A nursling yet for Hope to school.
The riot of the world and glare
Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
And by a sweet delusion he
Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
He deemed of human life the goal
To be a charming mystery:
He racked his brains to find its clue
And marvels deemed he thus should view.
This he believed: a kindred spirit
Impelled to union with his own
Lay languishing both day and night--
Waiting his coming--his alone!
He deemed his friends but longed to make
Great sacrifices for his sake!
That a friend's arm in every case
Felled a calumniator base!
That chosen heroes consecrate,
Friends of the sons of every land,
Exist--that their immortal band
Shall surely, be it soon or late,
Pour on this orb a dazzling light
And bless mankind with full delight.
Compassion now or wrath inspires
And now philanthropy his soul,
And now his youthful heart desires
The path which leads to glory's goal.
His harp beneath that sky had rung
Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
And at the altar of their fame
He kindled his poetic flame.
But from the Muses' loftiest height
The gifted songster never swerved,
But proudly in his song preserved
An ever transcendental flight;
His transports were quite maidenly,
Charming with grave simplicity.He sang of love--to love a slave.
His ditties were as pure and bright
As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
As a babe's slumber, or the light
Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
Goddess of lovers' tender sighs.
He sang of separation grim,
Of what not, and of distant dim,
Of roses to romancers dear;
To foreign lands he would allude,
Where long time he in solitude
Had let fall many a bitter tear:
He sang of life's fresh colours stained
Before he eighteen years attained.Since Eugene in that solitude
Gifts such as these alone could prize,
A scant attendance Lenski showed
At neighbouring hospitalities.
He shunned those parties boisterous;
The conversation tedious
About the crop of hay, the wine,
The kennel or a kindred line,
Was certainly not erudite
Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
A sense of social delight,
But still more stupid did appear
The gossip of their ladies fair.Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
Lenski as a good match received,--
Such is the country custom good;
All mothers their sweet girls believed
Suitable for this semi-Russian.
He enters: rapidly discussion
Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
The sorrows of a single state.
Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
The young proprietor we find;
To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
And a guitar produced we see,
And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
_Come to my golden palace, dear_!
But Lenski, having no desire
Vows matrimonial to break,
With our Oneguine doth aspire
Acquaintance instantly to make.
They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
Or ice and flame, are not diverse
If they were similar in aught.
At first such contradictions wrought
Mutual repulsion and ennui,
But grown familiar side by side
On horseback every day they ride--
Inseparable soon they be.
Thus oft--this I myself confess--
Men become friends from idleness.But even thus not now-a-days!
In spite of common sense we're wont
As cyphers others to appraise,
Ourselves as unities to count;
And like Napoleons each of us
A million bipeds reckons thus
One instrument for his own use--
Feeling is silly, dangerous.
Eugene, more tolerant than this
(Though certainly mankind he knew
And usually despised it too),
Exceptionless as no rule is,
A few of different temper deemed,
Feeling in others much esteemed.With smiling face he Lenski hears;
The poet's fervid conversation
And judgment which unsteady veers
And eye which gleams with inspiration--
All this was novel to Eugene.
The cold reply with gloomy mien
He oft upon his lips would curb,
Thinking: 'tis foolish to disturb
This evanescent boyish bliss.
Time without me will lessons give,
So meantime let him joyous live
And deem the world perfection is!
Forgive the fever youth inspires,
And youthful madness, youthful fires.The gulf between them was so vast,
Debate commanded ample food--
The laws of generations past,
The fruits of science, evil, good,
The prejudices all men have,
The fatal secrets of the grave,
And life and fate in turn selected
Were to analysis subjected.
The fervid poet would recite,
Carried away by ecstasy,
Fragments of northern poetry,
Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
Though scarcely following what was said,
Attentive listened to the lad.But more the passions occupy
The converse of our hermits twain,
And, heaving a regretful sigh,
An exile from their troublous reign,
Eugene would speak regarding these.
Thrice happy who their agonies
Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
Still happier he who ne'er hath known!
By absence who hath chilled his love,
His hate by slander, and who spends
Existence without wife or friends,
Whom jealous transport cannot move,
And who the rent-roll of his race
Ne'er trusted to the treacherous ace.When, wise at length, we seek repose
Beneath the flag of Quietude,
When Passion's fire no longer glows
And when her violence reviewed--
Each gust of temper, silly word,
Seems so unnatural and absurd:
Reduced with effort unto sense,
We hear with interest intense
The accents wild of other's woes,
They stir the heart as heretofore.
So ancient warriors, battles o'er,
A curious interest disclose
In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
Lost in the hamlet far away.And in addition youth is flame
And cannot anything conceal,
Is ever ready to proclaim
The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
Deeming himself a veteran scarred
In love's campaigns Oneguine heard
With quite a lachrymose expression
The youthful poet's fond confession.
He with an innocence extreme
His inner consciousness laid bare,
And Eugene soon discovered there
The story of his young love's dream,
Where plentifully feelings flow
Which we experienced long ago.Alas! he loved as in our times
Men love no more, as only the
Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
Is still condemned in love to be;
One image occupied his mind,
Constant affection intertwined
And an habitual sense of pain;
And distance interposed in vain,
Nor years of separation all
Nor homage which the Muse demands
Nor beauties of far distant lands
Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
His constant soul could ever tire,
Which glowed with virginal desire.When but a boy he Olga loved
Unknown as yet the aching heart,
He witnessed tenderly and moved
Her girlish gaiety and sport.
Beneath the sheltering oak tree's shade
He with his little maiden played,
Whilst the fond parents, friends thro' life,
Dreamed in the future man and wife.
And full of innocent delight,
As in a thicket's humble shade,
Beneath her parents' eyes the maid
Grew like a lily pure and white,
Unseen in thick and tangled grass
By bee and butterfly which pass.'Twas she who first within his breast
Poetic transport did infuse,
And thoughts of Olga first impressed
A mournful temper on his Muse.
Farewell! thou golden days of love!
'Twas then he loved the tangled grove
And solitude and calm delight,
The moon, the stars, and shining night--
The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
To whom we used to consecrate
A promenade in twilight late
With tears which secret sufferers love--
But now in her effulgence pale
A substitute for lamps we hail!Obedient she had ever been
And modest, cheerful as the morn,
As a poetic life serene,
Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
Her locks were of a golden hue,
Her movements, voice and figure slight,
All about Olga--to a light
Romance of love I pray refer,
You'll find her portrait there, I vouch;
I formerly admired her much
But finally grew bored by her.
But with her elder sister I
Must now my stanzas occupy.Tattiana was her appellation.
We are the first who such a name
In pages of a love narration
With such a perversity proclaim.
But wherefore not?--'Tis pleasant, nice,
Euphonious, though I know a spice
It carries of antiquity
And of the attic. Honestly,
We must admit but little taste
Doth in us or our names appear,
And education runs to waste,
Endowing us from out her store
With affectation,--nothing more.
And so Tattiana was her name,
Nor by her sister's brilliancy
Nor by her beauty she became
The cynosure of every eye.
Shy, silent did the maid appear
As in the timid forest deer,
Even beneath her parents' roof
Stood as estranged from all aloof,
Nearest and dearest knew not how
To fawn upon and love express;
A child devoid of childishness
To romp and play she ne'er would go:
Oft staring through the window pane
Would she in silence long remain.Contemplativeness, her delight,
E'en from her cradle's earliest dream,
Adorned with many a vision bright
Of rural life the sluggish stream;
Ne'er touched her fingers indolent
The needle nor, o'er framework bent,
Would she the canvas tight enrich
With gay design and silken stitch.
Desire to rule ye may observe
When the obedient doll in sport
An infant maiden doth exhort
Polite demeanour to preserve,
Gravely repeating to another
Recent instructions of its mother.But Tania ne'er displayed a passion
For dolls, e'en from her earliest years,
And gossip of the town and fashion
She ne'er repeated unto hers.
Strange unto her each childish game,
But when the winter season came
And dark and drear the evenings were,
Terrible tales she loved to hear.
And when for Olga nurse arrayed
In the broad meadow a gay rout,
All the young people round about,
At prisoner's base she never played.
Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
Their giddy sports she ne'er enjoyed.She loved upon the balcony
To anticipate the break of day,
When on the pallid eastern sky
The starry beacons fade away,
The horizon luminous doth grow,
Morning's forerunners, breezes blow
And gradually day unfolds.
In winter, when Night longer holds
A hemisphere beneath her sway,
Longer the East inert reclines
Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
And calmly sleeps the hours away,
At the same hour she oped her eyes
And would by candlelight arise.Romances pleased her from the first,
Her all in all did constitute;
In love adventures she was versed,
Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
Not a bad fellow was her father
Though superannuated rather;
In books he saw nought to condemn
But, as he never opened them,
Viewed them with not a little scorn,
And gave himself but little pain
His daughter's book to ascertain
Which 'neath her pillow lay till morn.
His wife was also mad upon
The works of Mr. Richardson.She was thus fond of Richardson
Not that she had his works perused,
Or that adoring Grandison
That rascal Lovelace she abused;
But that Princess Pauline of old,
Her Moscow cousin, often told
The tale of these romantic men;
Her husband was a bridegroom then,
And she despite herself would waste
Sighs on another than her lord
Whose qualities appeared to afford
More satisfaction to her taste.
Her Grandison was in the Guard,
A noted fop who gambled hard.Like his, her dress was always nice,
The height of fashion, fitting tight,
But contrary to her advice
The girl in marriage they unite.
Then, her distraction to allay,
The bridegroom sage without delay
Removed her to his country seat,
Where God alone knows whom she met.
She struggled hard at first thus pent,
Night separated from her spouse,
Then became busy with the house,
First reconciled and then content;
Habit was given us in distress
By Heaven in lieu of happiness.Habit alleviates the grief
Inseparable from our lot;
This great discovery relief
And consolation soon begot.
And then she soon 'twixt work and leisure
Found out the secret how at pleasure
To dominate her worthy lord,
And harmony was soon restored.
The workpeople she superintended,
Mushrooms for winter salted down,
Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,
The bath on Saturdays attended,
When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
And all without her husband's leave.
In her friends' albums, time had been,
With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
And in her conversation drawled.
She wore her corset tightly bound,
The Russian N with nasal sound
She would pronounce _a la Francaise_;
But soon she altered all her ways,
Corset and album and Pauline,
Her sentimental verses all,
She soon forgot, began to call
Akulka who was once Celine,
And had with waddling in the end
Her caps and night-dresses to mend.As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
In her affairs ne'er interfered,
Entrusted all to her sincerely,
In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
Existence calmly sped along,
And oft at eventide a throng
Of friends unceremonious would
Assemble from the neighbourhood:
They growl a bit--they scandalise--
They crack a feeble joke and smile--
Thus the time passes and meanwhile
Olga the tea must supervise--
'Tis time for supper, now for bed,
And soon the friendly troop hath fled.They in a peaceful life preserved
Customs by ages sanctified,
Strictly the Carnival observed,
Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
Twice in the year to fast were bound,
Of whirligigs were very fond,
Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
When people with long countenance
On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
Three tears they dropt with humble mein
Upon a bunch of lovage green;
_Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
On guests their servants used to wait
By rank as settled by the State.
Thus age approached, the common doom,
And death before the husband wide
Opened the portals of the tomb
And a new diadem supplied.
Just before dinner-time he slept,
By neighbouring families bewept,
By children and by faithful wife
With deeper woe than others' grief.
He was an honest gentleman,
And where at last his bones repose
The epitaph on marble shows:
_Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
Servant of God and brigadier,
Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
To his Penates now returned,
Vladimir Lenski visited
His neighbour's lowly tomb and mourned
Above the ashes of the dead.
There long time sad at heart he stayed:
"Poor Yorick," mournfully he said,
"How often in thine arms I lay;
How with thy medal I would play,
The Medal Otchakoff conferred!
To me he would his Olga give,
Would whisper: shall I so long live?"--
And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
Lenski his pencil-case took out
And an elegiac poem wrote.
Likewise an epitaph with tears
He writes upon his parents' tomb,
And thus ancestral dust reveres.
Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
Harvests of souls unceasingly
By Providence's dark decree!
They blossom, ripen and they fall
And others rise ephemeral!
Thus our light race grows up and lives,
A moment effervescing stirs,
Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
And our successors soon shall drive
Us from the world wherein we live.Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
Of frivolous existence, friends;
Its insignificance I know
And care but little for its ends.
To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
And agitate my heart again;
And thus it is 'twould cause me pain
Without the faintest trace to leave
This world. I do not praise desire,
Yet still apparently aspire
My mournful fate in verse to weave,
That like a friendly voice its tone
Rescue me from oblivion.Perchance some heart 'twill agitate,
And then the stanzas of my theme
Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
Perish absorbed by Lethe's stream.
Then it may be, O flattering tale,
Some future ignoramus shall
My famous portrait indicate
And cry: he was a poet great!
My gratitude do not disdain,
Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
Whose memory doth not refuse
My light productions to retain,
Whose hands indulgently caress
The bays of age and helplessness.
The Country DamselCanto The Third"Whither away? Deuce take the bard!"--
"Good-bye, Oneguine, I must go."--
"I won't detain you; but 'tis hard
To guess how you the eve pull through."--
"At Larina's."--"Hem, that is queer!
Pray is it not a tough affair
Thus to assassinate the eve?"--
"Not at all."--"That I can't conceive!
'Tis something of this sort I deem.
In the first place, say, am I right?
A Russian household simple quite,
Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
Preserves and an eternal prattle
About the rain and flax and cattle."--
"No misery I see in that"--
"Boredom, my friend, behold the ill--"
"Your fashionable world I hate,
Domestic life attracts me still,
Where--"--"What! another eclogue spin?
For God's sake, Lenski, don't begin!
What! really going? 'Tis too bad!
But Lenski, I should be so glad
Would you to me this Phyllis show,
Fair source of every fine idea,
Verses and tears et cetera.
Present me."--"You are joking."--"No."--
"Delighted."--"When?"--"This very night.
They will receive us with delight."
Whilst homeward by the nearest route
Our heroes at full gallop sped,
Can we not stealthily make out
What they in conversation said?--
"How now, Oneguine, yawning still?"--
"'Tis habit, Lenski."--"Is your ill
More troublesome than usual?"--"No!
How dark the night is getting though!
Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
The drive becomes monotonous--
Well! Larina appears to us
An ancient lady full of grace.--
That bilberry wine, I'm sore afraid,
The deuce with my inside has played."
"Say, of the two which was Tattiana?"
"She who with melancholy face
And silent as the maid Svetlana
Hard by the window took her place."--
"The younger, you're in love with her!"
"Well!"--"I the elder should prefer,
Were I like you a bard by trade--
In Olga's face no life's displayed.
'Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
An oval countenance and pink,
Yon silly moon upon the brink
Of the horizon she is like!"--
Vladimir something curtly said
Nor further comment that night made.
Meantime Oneguine's apparition
At Larina's abode produced
Quite a sensation; the position
To all good neighbours' sport conduced.
Endless conjectures all propound
And secretly their views expound.
What jokes and guesses now abound,
A beau is for Tattiana found!
In fact, some people were assured
The wedding-day had been arranged,
But the date subsequently changed
Till proper rings could be procured.
On Lenski's matrimonial fate
They long ago had held debate.
Of course Tattiana was annoyed
By such allusions scandalous,
Yet was her inmost soul o'erjoyed
With satisfaction marvellous,
As in her heart the thought sank home,
I am in love, my hour hath come!
Thus in the earth the seed expands
Obedient to warm Spring's commands.
Long time her young imagination
By indolence and languor fired
The fated nutriment desired;
And long internal agitation
Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
She waited for--I don't know whom!
The fatal hour had come at last--
She oped her eyes and cried: 'tis he!
Alas! for now before her passed
The same warm vision constantly;
Now all things round about repeat
Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
His name: the tenderness of home
Tiresome unto her hath become
And the kind-hearted servitors:
Immersed in melancholy thought,
She hears of conversation nought
And hated casual visitors,
Their coming which no man expects,
And stay whose length none recollects.
Now with what eager interest
She the delicious novel reads,
With what avidity and zest
She drinks in those seductive deeds!
All the creations which below
From happy inspiration flow,
The swain of Julia Wolmar,
Malek Adel and De Linar,
Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
And that unrivalled paragon,
The sleep-compelling Grandison,
Our tender dreamer had enrolled
A single being: 'twas in fine
No other than Oneguine mine.
Dreaming herself the heroine
Of the romances she preferred,
Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,--
Tattiana through the forest erred,
And the bad book accompanies.
Upon those pages she descries
Her passion's faithful counterpart,
Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
She heaves a sigh and deep intent
On raptures, sorrows not her own,
She murmurs in an undertone
A letter for her hero meant:
That hero, though his merit shone,
Was certainly no Grandison.
Alas! my friends, the years flit by
And after them at headlong pace
The evanescent fashions fly
In motley and amusing chase.
The world is ever altering!
Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
And courtier, fop, and usurer
Would once in powdered wig appear;
Time was, the poet's tender quill
In hopes of everlasting fame
A finished madrigal would frame
Or couplets more ingenious still;
Time was, a valiant general might
Serve who could neither read nor write.Time was, in style magniloquent
Authors replete with sacred fire
Their heroes used to represent
All that perfection could desire;
Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
Their idols they were wont to invest
With intellect, a taste refined,
And handsome countenance combined,
A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
The excited hero in a trice
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
And in the final tome we learnt,
Vice had due punishment awarded,
Virtue was with a bride rewarded.But now our minds are mystified
And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
Vice in romance is glorified
And triumphs in career erotic.
The monsters of the British Muse
Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
The idols of their adoration
A Vampire fond of meditation,
Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Byron's capricious phantasy
Could in romantic mantle drape
E'en hopeless egoism's dark shape.
My friends, what means this odd digression?
May be that I by heaven's decrees
Shall abdicate the bard's profession,
And shall adopt some new caprice.
Thus having braved Apollo's rage
With humble prose I'll fill my page
And a romance in ancient style
Shall my declining years beguile;
Nor shall my pen paint terribly
The torment born of crime unseen,
But shall depict the touching scene
Of Russian domesticity;
I will descant on love's sweet dream,
The olden time shall be my theme.Old people's simple conversations
My unpretending page shall fill,
Their offspring's innocent flirtations
By the old lime-tree or the rill,
Their Jealousy and separation
And tears of reconciliation:
Fresh cause of quarrel then I'll find,
But finally in wedlock bind.
The passionate speeches I'll repeat,
Accents of rapture or despair
I uttered to my lady fair
Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
Then they came easily enow,
My tongue is somewhat rusty now.Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
What bitter tears with thee I shed!
Thou hast resigned thy destiny
Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
Thou'lt suffer, dearest, but before,
Hope with her fascinating power
To dire contentment shall give birth
And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
Thou'lt quaff love's sweet envenomed stream,
Fantastic images shall swarm
In thy imagination warm,
Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
And wheresoe'er thy footsteps err,
Confront thy fated torturer!Love's pangs Tattiana agonize.
She seeks the garden in her need--
Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
And cares not farther to proceed;
Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
Barely to draw her breath she seems,
Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
And now 'tis night, the guardian moon
Sails her allotted course on high,
And from the misty woodland nigh
The nightingale trills forth her tune;
Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
And thus unto her nurse did say:"Nurse, 'tis so close I cannot rest.
Open the window--sit by me."
"What ails thee, dear?"--"I feel depressed.
Relate some ancient history."
"But which, my dear?--In days of yore
Within my memory I bore
Many an ancient legend which
In monsters and fair dames was rich;
But now my mind is desolate,
What once I knew is clean forgot--
Alas! how wretched now my lot!"
"But tell me, nurse, can you relate
The days which to your youth belong?
Were you in love when you were young?"--"Alack! Tattiana," she replied,
"We never loved in days of old,
My mother-in-law who lately died
Had killed me had the like been told."
"How came you then to wed a man?"--
"Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
Was younger than myself, my light,
For I myself was thirteen quite;
The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
Her suit before my parents pressing:
At last my father gave his blessing,
And bitter tears of fright I shed.
Weeping they loosed my tresses long
And led me off to church with song."
"Then amongst strangers I was left--
But I perceive thou dost not heed--"
"Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
Mortally sick I am indeed.
Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain--"
"My darling child, thou art in pain.--
The Lord deliver her and save!
Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
I'll sprinkle thee with holy water.--
How thy hands burn!"--"Dear nurse, I'm well.
I am--in love--you know--don't tell!"
"The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!"--
And the old nurse a brief prayer said
And crossed with trembling hand the maid."I am in love," her whispers tell
The aged woman in her woe:
"My heart's delight, thou art not well."--
"I am in love, nurse! leave me now."
Behold! the moon was shining bright
And showed with an uncertain light
Tattiana's beauty, pale with care,
Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
And on the footstool sitting down
Beside our youthful heroine fair,
A kerchief round her silver hair
The aged nurse in ample gown,
Whilst all creation seemed to dream
Enchanted by the moon's pale beam.
But borne in spirit far away
Tattiana gazes on the moon,
And starting suddenly doth say:
"Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
Pen, paper bring: the table too
Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go--
Good-night." Behold! she is alone!
'Tis silent--on her shines the moon--
Upon her elbow she reclines,
And Eugene ever in her soul
Indites an inconsiderate scroll
Wherein love innocently pines.
Now it is ready to be sent--
For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?I have known beauties cold and raw
As Winter in their purity,
Striking the intellect with awe
By dull insensibility,
And I admired their common sense
And natural benevolence,
But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
For on their brows I trembling read
The inscription o'er the gates of Hell
"Abandon hope for ever here!"
Love to inspire doth woe appear
To such--delightful to repel.
Perchance upon the Neva e'en
Similar dames ye may have seen.
Amid submissive herds of men
Virgins miraculous I see,
Who selfishly unmoved remain
Alike by sighs and flattery.
But what astonished do I find
When harsh demeanour hath consigned
A timid love to banishment?--
On fresh allurements they are bent,
At least by show of sympathy;
At least their accents and their words
Appear attuned to softer chords;
And then with blind credulity
The youthful lover once again
Pursues phantasmagoria vain.Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?--
Because in singleness of thought
She never of deception dreamed
But trusted the ideal she wrought?--
Because her passion wanted art,
Obeyed the impulses of heart?--
Because she was so innocent,
That Heaven her character had blent
With an imagination wild,
With intellect and strong volition
And a determined disposition,
An ardent heart and yet so mild?--
Doth love's incautiousness in her
So irremissible appear?O ye whom tender love hath pained
Without the ken of parents both,
Whose hearts responsive have remained
To the impressions of our youth,
The all-entrancing joys of love--
Young ladies, if ye ever strove
The mystic lines to tear away
A lover's letter might convey,
Or into bold hands anxiously
Have e'er a precious tress consigned,
Or even, silent and resigned,
When separation's hour drew nigh,
Have felt love's agitated kiss
With tears, confused emotions, bliss,--With unanimity complete,
Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
The sneers of critics superfine;
And you, O maids immaculate,
Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
E'en as the presence of a snake,
I the same admonition make.
Who knows? with love's consuming flame
Perchance you also soon may burn,
Then to some gallant in your turn
Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
The triumph of a conquest new.
The God of Love is after you!A coquette loves by calculation,
Tattiana's love was quite sincere,
A love which knew no limitation,
Even as the love of children dear.
She did not think "procrastination
Enhances love in estimation
And thus secures the prey we seek.
His vanity first let us pique
With hope and then perplexity,
Excruciate the heart and late
With jealous fire resuscitate,
Lest jaded with satiety,
The artful prisoner should seek
Incessantly his chains to break."I still a complication view,
My country's honour and repute
Demands that I translate for you
The letter which Tattiana wrote.
At Russ she was by no means clever
And read our newspapers scarce ever,
And in her native language she
Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
So she in French herself expressed.
I cannot help it I declare,
Though hitherto a lady ne'er
In Russ her love made manifest,
And never hath our language proud
In correspondence been allowed.
They wish that ladies should, I hear,
Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
I can't conceive a little dear
With the "Well-Wisher" in her hand!
I ask, all ye who poets are,
Is it not true? the objects fair,
To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
Had to compose in secret rhymes,
To whom your hearts were consecrate,--
Did they not all the Russian tongue
With little knowledge and that wrong
In charming fashion mutilate?
Did not their lips with foreign speech
The native Russian tongue impeach?
God grant I meet not at a ball
Or at a promenade mayhap,
A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
Or a professor in tulle cap.
As rosy lips without a smile,
The Russian language I deem vile
Without grammatical mistakes.
May be, and this my terror wakes,
The fair of the next generation,
As every journal now entreats,
Will teach grammatical conceits,
Introduce verse in conversation.
But I--what is all this to me?
Will to the old times faithful be.Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
With inexact pronunciation
Raises within my breast as oft
As formerly much agitation.
Repentance wields not now her spell
And gallicisms I love as well
As the sins of my youthful days
Or Bogdanovitch's sweet lays.
But I must now employ my Muse
With the epistle of my fair;
I promised!--Did I so?--Well, there!
Now I am ready to refuse.
I know that Parny's tender pen
Is no more cherished amongst men.
Bard of the "Feasts," and mournful breast,
If thou wert sitting by my side,
With this immoderate request
I should alarm our friendship tried:
In one of thine enchanting lays
To russify the foreign phrase
Of my impassioned heroine.
Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
I yield with a low reverence;
But lonely beneath Finnish skies
Where melancholy rocks arise
He wanders in his indolence;
Careless of fame his spirit high
Hears not my importunity!
Tattiana's letter I possess,
I guard it as a holy thing,
And though I read it with distress,
I'm o'er it ever pondering.
Inspired by whom this tenderness,
This gentle daring who could guess?
Who this soft nonsense could impart,
Imprudent prattle of the heart,
Attractive in its banefulness?
I cannot understand. But lo!
A feeble version read below,
A print without the picture's grace,
Or, as it were, the Freischutz' score
Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o'er.I write to you! Is more required?
Can lower depths beyond remain?
'Tis in your power now, if desired,
To crush me with a just disdain.
But if my lot unfortunate
You in the least commiserate
You will not all abandon me.
At first, I clung to secrecy:
Believe me, of my present shame
You never would have heard the name,
If the fond hope I could have fanned
At times, if only once a week,
To see you by our fireside stand,
To listen to the words you speak,
Address to you one single phrase
And then to meditate for days
Of one thing till again we met.
'Tis said you are a misanthrope,
In country solitude you mope,
And we--an unattractive set--
Can hearty welcome give alone.
Why did you visit our poor place?
Forgotten in the village lone,
I never should have seen your face
And bitter torment never known.
The untutored spirit's pangs calmed down
By time
I had found my predestinate,
Become a faithful wife and e'en
A fond and careful mother been.
Another! to none other I
My heart's allegiance can resign,
My doom has been pronounced on high,
'Tis Heaven's will and I am thine.
The sum of my existence gone
But promise of our meeting gave,
I feel thou wast by God sent down
My guardian angel to the grave.
Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
Unseen thou wast already dear.
Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
I heard thy voice's resonance
Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
And cried within myself: 'tis he!
Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
With thee I conversed when I bore
Comfort and succour to the poor,
And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
To ease the anguish of my breast.
Nay! even as this instant fled,
Was it not thou, O vision bright,
That glimmered through the radiant night
And gently hovered o'er my head?
Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
To whisper comfort, love and hope?
Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
Or torturer malevolent?
Doubt and uncertainty decide:
All this may be an empty dream,
Delusions of a mind untried,
Providence otherwise may deem--
Then be it so! My destiny
From henceforth I confide to thee!
Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
And thy protection I implore.
Imagine! Here alone am I!
No one my anguish comprehends,
At times my reason almost bends,
And silently I here must die--
But I await thee: scarce alive
My heart with but one look revive;
Or to disturb my dreams approach
Alas! with merited reproach.
'Tis finished. Horrible to read!
With shame I shudder and with dread--
But boldly I myself resign:
Thine honour is my countersign!Tattiana moans and now she sighs
And in her grasp the letter shakes,
Even the rosy wafer dries
Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
Her head upon her breast declines
And an enchanting shoulder shines
From her half-open vest of night.
But lo! already the moon's light
Is waning. Yonder valley deep
Looms gray behind the mist and morn
Silvers the brook; the shepherd's horn
Arouses rustics from their sleep.
'Tis day, the family downstairs,
But nought for this Tattiana cares.The break of day she doth not see,
But sits in bed with air depressed,
Nor on the letter yet hath she
The image of her seal impressed.
But gray Phillippevna the door
Opened with care, and entering bore
A cup of tea upon a tray.
"'Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
My beauty, thou art ready too.
My morning birdie, yesternight
I was half silly with affright.
But praised be God! in health art thou!
The pains of night have wholly fled,
Thy cheek is as a poppy red!""Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!"--
"Command me, darling, what you choose"--
"Do not--you might--suspicious be;
But look you--ah! do not refuse."
"I call to witness God on high--"
"Then send your grandson quietly
To take this letter to O-- Well!
Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell--
Command him not to say a word--
I mean my name not to repeat."
"To whom is it to go, my sweet?
Of late I have been quite absurd,--
So many neighbours here exist--
Am I to go through the whole list?""How dull you are this morning, nurse!"
"My darling, growing old am I!
In age the memory gets worse,
But I was sharp in times gone by.
In times gone by thy bare command--"
"Oh! nurse, nurse, you don't understand!
What is thy cleverness to me?
The letter is the thing, you see,--
Oneguine's letter!"--"Ah! the thing!
Now don't be cross with me, my soul,
You know that I am now a fool--
But why are your cheeks whitening?"
"Nothing, good nurse, there's nothing wrong,
But send your grandson before long."No answer all that day was borne.
Another passed; 'twas just the same.
Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
Tattiana waits. No answer came!
Olga's admirer came that day:
"Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?"
The hostess doth interrogate:
"He hath neglected us of late."--
Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick--
"He promised here this day to ride,"
Lenski unto the dame replied,
"The post hath kept him, it is like."
Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
As if he cruelly had joked!'Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,
The china teapot too ye might
In clouds of steam above perceive.
Into the cups already sped
By Olga's hand distributed
The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
And a boy handed round the cream.
Tania doth by the casement linger
And breathes upon the chilly glass,
Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
And traces with a slender finger
Upon its damp opacity,
The mystic monogram, O. E.
In the meantime her spirit sinks,
Her weary eyes are filled with tears--
A horse's hoofs she hears--She shrinks!
Nearer they come--Eugene appears!
Ah! than a spectre from the dead
More swift the room Tattiana fled,
From hall to yard and garden flies,
Not daring to cast back her eyes.
She fears and like an arrow rushes
Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
The bridge and alley to the lake,
Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
Till out of breath upon a seatShe sank.--
"He's here! Eugene is here!
Merciful God, what will he deem?"
Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
Guards fondly hope's uncertain dream.
She waits, on fire her trembling frame--
Will he pursue?--But no one came.
She heard of servant-maids the note,
Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
Singing in chorus all the while.
(This by command; for it was found,
However cherries might abound,
They disappeared by stealth and guile,
So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit--
Device of rural minds acute!)Young maidens, fair maidens,
Friends and companions,
Disport yourselves, maidens,
Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
Come sing we in chorus
The secrets of maidens.
Allure the young gallant
With dance and with song.
As we lure the young gallant,
Espy him approaching,
Disperse yourselves, darlings,
And pelt him with cherries,
With cherries, red currants,
With raspberries, cherries.
Approach not to hearken
To secrets of virgins,
Approach not to gaze at
The frolics of maidens.They sang, whilst negligently seated,
Attentive to the echoing sound,
Tattiana with impatience waited
Until her heart less high should bound--
Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
But tremor still her frame possessed,
Nor did her blushes fade away,
More crimson every moment they.
Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
With iridescent wing doth flap
When captured in a schoolboy's cap;
Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
She from the winter corn espies
A sportsman who in covert lies.But finally she heaves a sigh,
And rising from her bench proceeds;
But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
When Eugene like a ghost did rise
Before her straight with roguish eyes.
Tattiana faltered, and became
Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
But this adventure's consequence
To-day, my friends, at any rate,
I am not strong enough to state;
I, after so much eloquence,
Must take a walk and rest a bit--
Some day I'll somehow finish it.
Rural LifeCanto The FourthThe less we love a lady fair
The easier 'tis to gain her grace,
And the more surely we ensnare
Her in the pitfalls which we place.
Time was when cold seduction strove
To swagger as the art of love,
Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
But this amusement delicate
Was worthy of that old baboon,
Our fathers used to dote upon;
The Lovelaces are out of date,
Their glory with their heels of red
And long perukes hath vanished.
For who imposture can endure,
A constant harping on one tune,
Serious endeavours to assure
What everybody long has known;
Ever to hear the same replies
And overcome antipathies
Which never have existed, e'en
In little maidens of thirteen?
And what like menaces fatigues,
Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
Epistles of six sheets or near,
Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
And husbands' tedious amity?
Such were the musings of Eugene.
He in the early years of life
Had a deluded victim been
Of error and the passions' strife.
By daily life deteriorated,
Awhile this beauty captivated,
And that no longer could inspire.
Slowly exhausted by desire,
Yet satiated with success,
In solitude or worldly din,
He heard his soul's complaint within,
With laughter smothered weariness:
And thus he spent eight years of time,
Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
Though beauty he no more adored,
He still made love in a queer way;
Rebuffed--as quickly reassured,
Jilted--glad of a holiday.
Without enthusiasm he met
The fair, nor parted with regret,
Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
Thus a guest with composure will
To take a hand at whist oft come:
He takes his seat, concludes his game,
And straight returning whence he came,
Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
And in the morning doth not know
Whither that evening he will go.
However, Tania's letter reading,
Eugene was touched with sympathy;
The language of her girlish pleading
Aroused in him sweet reverie.
He called to mind Tattiana's grace,
Pallid and melancholy face,
And in a vision, sinless, bright,
His spirit sank with strange delight.
May be the empire of the sense,
Regained authority awhile,
But he desired not to beguile
Such open-hearted innocence.
But to the garden once again
Wherein we lately left the twain.
Two minutes they in silence spent,
Oneguine then approached and said:
"You have a letter to me sent.
Do not excuse yourself. I read
Confessions which a trusting heart
May well in innocence impart.
Charming is your sincerity,
Feelings which long had ceased to be
It wakens in my breast again.
But I came not to adulate:
Your frankness I shall compensate
By an avowal just as plain.
An ear to my confession lend;
To thy decree my will I bend.
"If the domestic hearth could bless--
My sum of happiness contained;
If wife and children to possess
A happy destiny ordained:
If in the scenes of home I might
E'en for an instant find delight,
Then, I say truly, none but thee
I would desire my bride to be--
I say without poetic phrase,
Found the ideal of my youth,
Thee only would I choose, in truth,
As partner of my mournful days,
Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
And be as happy--as I might.
"But strange am I to happiness;
'Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
Me your perfections would not bless;
I am not worthy them in aught;
And honestly 'tis my belief
Our union would produce but grief.
Though now my love might be intense,
Habit would bring indifference.
I see you weep. Those tears of yours
Tend not my heart to mitigate,
But merely to exasperate;
Judge then what roses would be ours,
What pleasures Hymen would prepare
For us, may be for many a year.
"What can be drearier than the house,
Wherein the miserable wife
Deplores a most unworthy spouse
And leads a solitary life?
The tiresome man, her value knowing,
Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
Is full of frigid jealousy,
Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
Such am I. This did ye expect,
When in simplicity ye wrote
Your innocent and charming note
With so much warmth and intellect?
Hath fate apportioned unto thee
This lot in life with stern decree?"Ideas and time ne'er backward move;
My soul I cannot renovate--
I love you with a brother's love,
Perchance one more affectionate.
Listen to me without disdain.
A maid hath oft, may yet again
Replace the visions fancy drew;
Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
As in their turn the seasons roll.
'Tis evidently Heaven's will
You fall in love again. But still--
Learn to possess more self-control.
Not all will like myself proceed--
And thoughtlessness to woe might lead."Thus did our friend Oneguine preach:
Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
Attentive listened to his speech,
All breathless and without replies.
His arm he offers. Mute and sad,
Tattiana doth accept his aid;
And, hanging down her head, the maid
Around the garden homeward hies.
Together they returned, nor word
Of censure for the same incurred;
The country hath its liberties
And privileges nice allowed,
Even as Moscow, city proud.Confess, O ye who this peruse,
Oneguine acted very well
By poor Tattiana in the blues;
'Twas not the first time, I can tell
You, he a noble mind disclosed,
Though some men, evilly disposed,
Spared him not their asperities.
His friends and also enemies
Esteemed him much as the world goes.
Yes! every one must have his foes,
But Lord! from friends deliver me!
The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
I've had to make for having friends!But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
Dark, unavailing reverie,
I just hint, in parenthesis,
There is no stupid calumny
Born of a babbler in a loft
And by the world repeated oft,
There is no fishmarket retort
And no ridiculous report,
Which your true friend with a sweet smile
Where fashionable circles meet
A hundred times will not repeat,
Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
And yet he in your cause would strive
And loves you as--a relative!Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
Are all your relatives quite well?
Permit me; is it worth the trouble
For your instruction here to tell
What I by relatives conceive?
These are your relatives, believe:
Those whom we ought to love, caress,
With spiritual tenderness;
Whom, as the custom is of men,
We visit about Christmas Day,
Or by a card our homage pay,
That until Christmas comes again
They may forget that we exist.
And so--God bless them, if He list.In this the love of the fair sex
Beats that of friends and relatives:
In love, although its tempests vex,
Our liberty at least survives:
Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
The natural fickleness of passion,
The torrent of opinion,
And the fair sex as light as down!
Besides the hobbies of a spouse
Should be respected throughout life
By every proper-minded wife,
And this the faithful one allows,
When in as instant she is lost,--
Satan will jest, and at love's cost.Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
Where is he who doth not deceive?
Who words and actions will adjust
To standards in which we believe?
Oh! who is not calumnious?
Who labours hard to humour us?
To whom are our misfortunes grief
And who is not a tiresome thief?
My venerated reader, oh!
Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
Spare yourself unavailing pain
And all your love on self bestow;
A worthy object 'tis, and well
I know there's none more amiable.But from the interview what flowed?
Alas! It is not hard to guess.
The insensate fire of love still glowed
Nor discontinued to distress
A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
Tattiana more than ever burned
With hopeless passion: from her bed
Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
Her health, life's sweetness and its bloom,
Her smile and maidenly repose,
All vanished as an echo goes.
Across her youth a shade had come,
As when the tempest's veil is drawn
Across the smiling face of dawn.Alas! Tattiana fades away,
Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
Listless is she the livelong day
Nor interest in aught betrays.
Shaking with serious air the head,
In whispers low the neighbours said:
'Tis time she to the altar went!
But enough! Now, 'tis my intent
The imagination to enliven
With love which happiness extends;
Against my inclination, friends,
By sympathy I have been driven.
Forgive me! Such the love I bear
My heroine, Tattiana dear.Vladimir, hourly more a slave
To youthful Olga's beauty bright,
Into delicious bondage gave
His ardent soul with full delight.
Always together, eventide
Found them in darkness side by side,
At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
Around the meadow and the grove.
And what resulted? Drunk with love,
But with confused and bashful air,
Lenski at intervals would dare,
If Olga smilingly approve,
Dally with a dishevelled tress
Or kiss the border of her dress.To Olga frequently he would
Some nice instructive novel read,
Whose author nature understood
Better than Chateaubriand did
Yet sometimes pages two or three
(Nonsense and pure absurdity,
For maiden's hearing deemed unfit),
He somewhat blushing would omit:
Far from the rest the pair would creep
And  they
A game of chess would often play,
Buried in meditation deep,
Till absently Vladimir took
With his own pawn alas! his rook!Homeward returning, he at home
Is occupied with Olga fair,
An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
He leisurely adorns for her.
Landscapes thereon he would design,
A tombstone, Aphrodite's shrine,
Or, with a pen and colours fit,
A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
The "in memoriam" pages sought,
Where many another hand had signed
A tender couplet he combined,
A register of fleeting thought,
A flimsy trace of musings past
Which might for many ages last.Surely ye all have overhauled
A country damsel's album trim,
Which all her darling friends have scrawled
From first to last page to the rim.
Behold! orthography despising,
Metreless verses recognizing
By friendship how they were abused,
Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
Upon the opening page ye find:
_Qu'ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
Subscribed, _toujours a vous, Annette;_
And on the last one, underlined:
_Who in thy love finds more delight
Beyond this may attempt to write_.Infallibly you there will find
Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
And vows will probably be signed:
_Affectionately yours till death_.
Some army poet therein may
Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
In such an album with delight
I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
My verses, kindly meant, would earn
Delighted glances in return;
That afterwards with evil smile
They would not solemnly debate
If cleverly or not I prate.But, O ye tomes without compare,
Which from the devil's bookcase start,
Albums magnificent which scare
The fashionable rhymester's heart!
Yea! although rendered beauteous
By Tolstoy's pencil marvellous,
Though Baratynski verses penned,
The thunderbolt on you descend!
Whene'er a brilliant courtly dame
Presents her quarto amiably,
Despair and anger seize on me,
And a malicious epigram
Trembles upon my lips from spite,--
And madrigals I'm asked to write!
But Lenski madrigals ne'er wrote
In Olga's album, youthful maid,
To purest love he tuned his note
Nor frigid adulation paid.
What never was remarked or heard
Of Olga he in song averred;
His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
Both natural and truthful seemed.
Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise
In amorous flights when so inspired,
Singing God knows what maid admired,
And all thy precious elegies,
Sometime collected, shall relate
The story of thy life and fate.
Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
Incited by his stormy Muse
Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
But Olga would not such peruse.
When poets lachrymose recite
Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
Their own productions, some insist
No greater pleasure can exist
Just so! that modest swain is blest
Who reads his visionary theme
To the fair object of his dream,
A beauty languidly at rest,
Yes, happy--though she at his side
By other thoughts be occupied.But I the products of my Muse,
Consisting of harmonious lays,
To my old nurse alone peruse,
Companion of my childhood's days.
Or, after dinner's dull repast,
I by the button-hole seize fast
My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
And breathe a drama in his ear.
Or else ,
Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
I sail upon my lake at times
And terrify a swarm of ducks,
Who, heard the music of my lay,
Take to their wings and fly away.But to Oneguine! _A propos!_
Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
His daily occupations, lo!
Minutely I will now portray.
A hermit's life Oneguine led,
At seven in summer rose from bed,
And clad in airy costume took
His course unto the running brook.
There, aping Gulnare's bard, he spanned
His Hellespont from bank to bank,
And then a cup of coffee drank,
Some wretched journal in his hand;
Then dressed himself...
Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
The uncontaminated kiss
Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
A dinner, whimsical each course,
A bottle of a vintage white
And solitude and calm delight.
Such was Oneguine's sainted life,
And such unconsciously he led,
Nor marked how summer's prime had fled
In aimless ease and far from strife,
The curse of commonplace delight.
And town and friends forgotten quite.This northern summer of our own,
On winters of the south a skit,
Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
Though we will not acknowledge it.
Already Autumn chilled the sky,
The tiny sun shone less on high
And shorter had the days become.
The forests in mysterious gloom
Were stripped with melancholy sound,
Upon the earth a mist did lie
And many a caravan on high
Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
A weary season was at hand--
November at the gate did stand.The morn arises foggy, cold,
The silent fields no peasant nears,
The wolf upon the highways bold
With his ferocious mate appears.
Detecting him the passing horse
Snorts, and his rider bends his course
And wisely gallops to the hill.
No more at dawn the shepherd will
Drive out the cattle from their shed,
Nor at the hour of noon with sound
Of horn in circle call them round.
Singing inside her hut the maid
Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.Already crisp hoar frosts impose
O'er all a sheet of silvery dust
(Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
There! take it quickly, if ye must).
Behold! than polished floor more nice
The shining river clothed in ice;
A joyous troop of little boys
Engrave the ice with strident noise.
A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
Thinking to float upon the stream,
Descends the bank with care extreme,
But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
The first bright wreathing storm of snow
Which falls in starry flakes below.How in the country pass this time?
Walking? The landscape tires the eye
In winter by its blank and dim
And naked uniformity.
On horseback gallop o'er the steppe!
Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
His footing on the treacherous rime
And may fall headlong any time.
Alone beneath your rooftree stay
And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!
Keep your accounts! You'd rather not?
Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
Will pass; the same to-morrow try--
You'll spend your winter famously!
A true Childe Harold my Eugene
To idle musing was a prey;
At morn an icy bath within
He sat, and then the livelong day,
Alone within his habitation
And buried deep in meditation,
He round the billiard-table stalked,
The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
When evening o'er the landscape looms,
Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
A table to the fire is brought,
And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
Driving abreast three horses gray.
"Bring dinner now without delay!"Upon the table in a trice
Of widow Clicquot or Moet
A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
For the young poet they display.
Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
Its ebullition foaming white
My heart of old would captivate.
The last poor obol I was worth--
Was it not so?--for thee I gave,
And thy inebriating wave
Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
And oh! what verses, what delights,
Delicious visions, jests and fights!Alas! my stomach it betrays
With its exhilarating flow,
And I confess that now-a-days
I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
To cope with Ay no more I dare,
For Ay is like a mistress fair,
Seductive, animated, bright,
But wilful, frivolous, and light.
But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
Who in the agony of grief
Is ever ready with relief,
Assistance ever will extend,
Or quietly partake our woe.
All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
The golden ember now enshrines,
And barely visible the smoke
Upward in a thin stream inclines.
But little warmth the fireplace lends,
Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
The goblet still is bubbling bright--
Outside descend the mists of night.
How pleasantly the evening jogs
When o'er a glass with friends we prate
Just at the hour we designate
The time between the wolf and dogs--
I cannot tell on what pretence--
But lo! the friends to chat commence."How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?"--
"The family are all quite well--
Give me just half a glass of wine--
They sent their compliments--but oh!
How charming Olga's shoulders grow!
Her figure perfect grows with time!
She is an angel! We sometime
Must visit them. Come! you must own,
My friend, 'tis but to pay a debt,
For twice you came to them and yet
You never since your nose have shown.
But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
They have invited you this week.""Me?"--"Yes! It is Tattiana's fete
Next Saturday. The Larina
Told me to ask you. Ere that date
Make up your mind to go there."--"Ah!
It will be by a mob beset
Of every sort and every set!"--
"Not in the least, assured am I!"--
"Who will be there?"--"The family.
Do me a favour and appear.
Will you?"--"Agreed."--"I thank you, friend,"
And saying this Vladimir drained
His cup unto his maiden dear.
Then touching Olga they depart
In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!He was most gay. The happy date
In three weeks would arrive for them;
The secrets of the marriage state
And love's delicious diadem
With rapturous longing he awaits,
Nor in his dreams anticipates
Hymen's embarrassments, distress,
And freezing fits of weariness.
Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
In life domestic see a string
Of pictures painful harrowing,
A novel in Lafontaine's style,
My wretched Lenski's fate I mourn,
He seemed for matrimony born.He was beloved: or say at least,
He thought so, and existence charmed.
The credulous indeed are blest,
And he who, jealousy disarmed,
In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
Or, parable more flattering,
As butterflies to blossoms cling.
But wretched who anticipates,
Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
Who every gesture, every phrase
In true interpretation hates:
Whose heart experience icy made
And yet oblivion forbade.
The Fete
'Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
O my Svetlana.'--Joukovski
That year the autumn season late
Kept lingering on as loath to go,
All Nature winter seemed to await,
Till January fell no snow--
The third at night. Tattiana wakes
Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
Park, garden, palings, yard below
And roofs near morn blanched o'er with snow;
Upon the windows tracery,
The trees in silvery array,
Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
And the far mountains daintily
O'erspread with Winter's carpet bright,
All so distinct, and all so white!
Winter! The peasant blithely goes
To labour in his sledge forgot,
His pony sniffing the fresh snows
Just manages a feeble trot
Though deep he sinks into the drift;
Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,
Its driver seated on the rim
In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
Yonder the household lad doth run,
Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
Himself transformed into a hack;
To freeze his finger hath begun,
He laughs, although it aches from cold,
His mother from the door doth scold.
In scenes like these it may be though,
Ye feel but little interest,
They are all natural and low,
Are not with elegance impressed.
Another bard with art divine
Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
The first appearance of the snows
And all the joys which Winter knows.
He will delight you, I am sure,
When he in ardent verse portrays
Secret excursions made in sleighs;
But competition I abjure
Either with him or thee in song,
Bard of the Finnish maiden young.
Tattiana, Russian to the core,
Herself not knowing well the reason,
The Russian winter did adore
And the cold beauties of the season:
On sunny days the glistening rime,
Sledging, the snows, which at the time
Of sunset glow with rosy light,
The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
These evenings as in days of old
The Larinas would celebrate,
The servants used to congregate
And the young ladies fortunes told,
And every year distributed
Journeys and warriors to wed.
Tattiana in traditions old
Believed, the people's wisdom weird,
In dreams and what the moon foretold
And what she from the cards inferred.
Omens inspired her soul with fear,
Mysteriously all objects near
A hidden meaning could impart,
Presentiments oppressed her heart.
Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
Tattiana certainly infers
That guests approach: and when above
The new moon's crescent slim she spied,
Suddenly to the left hand side,
She trembled and grew deadly pale.
Or a swift meteor, may be,
Across the gloom of heaven would sail
And disappear in space; then she
Would haste in agitation dire
To mutter her concealed desire
Ere the bright messenger had set.
When in her walks abroad she met
A friar black approaching near,
Or a swift hare from mead to mead
Had run across her path at speed,
Wholly beside herself with fear,
Anticipating woe she pined,
Certain misfortune near opined.
Wherefore? She found a secret joy
In horror for itself alone,
Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
Thus her perversity hath shown.
Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!
When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
Before whose inexperienced sight
Life lies extended, vast and bright,
To peer into the future tries.
Old age through spectacles too peers,
Although the destined coffin nears,
Having lost all in life we prize.
It matters not. Hope e'en to these
With childlike lisp will lie to please.
Tattiana gazed with curious eye
On melted wax in water poured;
The clue unto some mystery
She deemed its outline might afford.
Rings from a dish of water full
In order due the maidens pull;
But when Tattiana's hand had ta'en
A ring she heard the ancient strain:
_The peasants there are rich as kings,
They shovel silver with a spade,
He whom we sing to shall be made
Happy and glorious_. But this brings
With sad refrain misfortune near.
Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.
Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
Sailed silently in unison--
Tattiana in the yard appears
In a half-open dressing-gown
And bends her mirror on the moon,
But trembling on the mirror dark
The sad moon only could remark.
List! the snow crunches--he draws nigh!
The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
And her voice sweeter than the sounds
Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
"What is your name?" The boor looked dazed,
And "Agathon" replied, amazed.
Tattiana
By night prepared for sorcery,
And in the bathroom did command
To lay two covers secretly.
But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
And I, remembering Svetlana,
Become alarmed. So never mind!
I'm not for witchcraft now inclined.
So she her silken sash unlaced,
Undressed herself and went to bed
And soon Lel hovered o'er her head.
Beneath her downy pillow placed,
A little virgin mirror peeps.
'Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
She dreamt she journeyed o'er a field
All covered up with snow in heaps,
By melancholy fogs concealed.
Amid the snowdrifts which surround
A stream, by winter's ice unbound,
Impetuously clove its way
With boiling torrent dark and gray;
Two poles together glued by ice,
A fragile bridge and insecure,
Spanned the unbridled torrent o'er;
Beside the thundering abyss
Tattiana in despair unfeigned
Rooted unto the spot remained.As if against obstruction sore
Tattiana o'er the stream complained;
To help her to the other shore
No one appeared to lend a hand.
But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
And what from its recess appears?
A bristly bear of monstrous size!
He roars, and "Ah!" Tattiana cries.
He offers her his murderous paw;
She nerves herself from her alarm
And leans upon the monster's arm,
With footsteps tremulous with awe
Passes the torrent But alack!
Bruin is marching at her back!She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
Accelerates her hasty pace,
But cannot anyhow evade
Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
A forest now she sees in front
With fir-trees standing motionless
In melancholy loveliness,
Their branches by the snow bowed down.
Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
The shining orbs of night appear;
There is no path; the storm hath strewn
Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
And all in snow is buried deep.The wood she enters--bear behind,--
In snow she sinks up to the knee;
Now a long branch itself entwined
Around her neck, now violently
Away her golden earrings tore;
Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
Her handkerchief she loses now;
No time to pick it up! afraid,
She hears the bear behind her press,
Nor dares the skirting of her dress
For shame lift up the modest maid.
She runs, the bear upon her trail,
Until her powers of running fail.She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
Adroitly seized and carried her;
Submissive as if in a swoon,
She cannot draw a breath or stir.
He dragged her by a forest road
Till amid trees a hovel showed,
By barren snow heaped up and bound,
A tangled wilderness around.
Bright blazed the window of the place,
Within resounded shriek and shout:
"My chum lives here," Bruin grunts out.
"Warm yourself here a little space!"
Straight for the entrance then he made
And her upon the threshold laid.Recovering, Tania gazes round;
Bear gone--she at the threshold placed;
Inside clink glasses, cries resound
As if it were some funeral feast.
But deeming all this nonsense pure,
She peeped through a chink of the door.
What doth she see? Around the board
Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
A canine face with horns thereon,
Another with cock's head appeared,
Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
There an imperious skeleton;
A dwarf adorned with tail, again
A shape half cat and half a crane.Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
A crab upon a spider rides,
Perched on a goose's neck a skull
In scarlet cap revolving glides.
A windmill too a jig performs
And wildly waves its arms and storms;
Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
The speech of man and tramp of horse.
But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
When in that company she saw
Him who inspired both love and awe,
The hero we immortalize.
Oneguine sat the table by
And viewed the door with cunning eye.All bustle when he makes a sign:
He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
He smiles, in laughter all combine;
He knits his brows--'tis silent all.
He there is master--that is plain;
Tattiana courage doth regain
And grown more curious by far
Just placed the entrance door ajar.
The wind rose instantly, blew out
The fire of the nocturnal lights;
A trouble fell upon the sprites;
Oneguine lightning glances shot;
Furious he from the table rose;
All arise. To the door he goes.Terror assails her. Hastily
Tattiana would attempt to fly,
She cannot--then impatiently
She strains her throat to force a cry--
She cannot--Eugene oped the door
And the young girl appeared before
Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
Are turned upon her. All combine
In one great shout: she's mine! she's mine!"Mine!" cried Eugene with savage tone.
The troop of apparitions fled,
And in the frosty night alone
Remained with him the youthful maid.
With tranquil air Oneguine leads
Tattiana to a corner, bids
Her on a shaky bench sit down;
His head sinks slowly, rests upon
Her shoulder--Olga swiftly came--
And Lenski followed--a light broke--
His fist Oneguine fiercely shook
And gazed around with eyes of flame;
The unbidden guests he roughly chides--
Tattiana motionless abides.The strife grew furious and Eugene
Grasped a long knife and instantly
Struck Lenski dead--across the scene
Dark shadows thicken--a dread cry
Was uttered, and the cabin shook--
Tattiana terrified awoke.
She gazed around her--it was day.
Lo! through the frozen windows play
Aurora's ruddy rays of light--
The door flew open--Olga came,
More blooming than the Boreal flame
And swifter than the swallow's flight.
"Come," she cried, "sister, tell me e'en
Whom you in slumber may have seen."But she, her sister never heeding,
With book in hand reclined in bed,
Page after page continued reading,
But no reply unto her made.
Although her book did not contain
The bard's enthusiastic strain,
Nor precepts sage nor pictures e'en,
Yet neither Virgil nor Racine
Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,
Nor the _Journal des Modes_, I vouch,
Ever absorbed a maid so much:
Its name, my friends, was Martin Zadeka,
The chief of the Chaldean wise,
Who dreams expound and prophecies.Brought by a pedlar vagabond
Unto their solitude one day,
This monument of thought profound
Tattiana purchased with a stray
Tome of "Malvina," and but three
And a half rubles down gave she;
Also, to equalise the scales,
She got a book of nursery tales,
A grammar, likewise Petriads two,
Marmontel also, tome the third;
Tattiana every day conferred
With Martin Zadeka. In woe
She consolation thence obtained--
Inseparable they remained.
The dream left terror in its train.
Not knowing its interpretation,
Tania the meaning would obtain
Of such a dread hallucination.
Tattiana to the index flies
And alphabetically tries
The words _bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,
Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,
Et cetera_; but nothing showed
Her Martin Zadeka in aid,
Though the foul vision promise made
Of a most mournful episode,
And many a day thereafter laid
A load of care upon the maid."But lo! forth from the valleys dun
With purple hand Aurora leads,
Swift following in her wake, the sun,"
And a grand festival proceeds.
The Larinas were since sunrise
O'erwhelmed with guests; by families
The neighbours come, in sledge approach,
Britzka, kibitka, or in coach.
Crush and confusion in the hall,
Latest arrivals' salutations,
Barking, young ladies' osculations,
Shouts, laughter, jamming 'gainst the wall,
Bows and the scrape of many feet,
Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.
Bringing his partner corpulent
Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;
Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,
Oppressor of the wretched poor;
And the Skatenines, aged pair,
With all their progeny were there,
Who from two years to thirty tell;
Petoushkoff, the provincial swell;
Bouyanoff too, my cousin, wore
His wadded coat and cap with peak;
And Flianoff, pensioned councillor,
Rogue and extortioner of yore,
Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.
The family of Kharlikoff,
Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,
Who arrived lately from Tamboff,
In spectacles and chestnut wig.
Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought
In Tania's praise in pouch he brought,
Known unto children perfectly:
_Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie_.
Among some ancient ballads thrust,
He found them in an almanac,
And the sagacious Triquet back
To light had brought them from their dust,
Whilst he "belle Nina" had the face
By "belle Tattiana" to replace.Lo! from the nearest barrack came,
Of old maids the divinity,
And comfort of each country dame,
The captain of a company.
He enters. Ah! good news to-day!
The military band will play.
The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!
So there will be a dance to-night.
Girls in anticipation skip!
But dinner-time comes. Two and two
They hand in hand to table go.
The maids beside Tattiana keep--
Men opposite. The cross they sign
And chattering loud sit down to dine.Ceased for a space all chattering.
Jaws are at work. On every side
Plates, knives and forks are clattering
And ringing wine-glasses are plied.
But by degrees the crowd begin
To raise a clamour and a din:
They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,
They shout and no one lists at all.
The doors swing open: Lenski makes
His entrance with Oneguine. "Ah!
At last the author!" cries Mamma.
The guests make room; aside each takes
His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;
The friends are called and quickly placed.Right opposite Tattiana placed,
She, than the morning moon more pale,
More timid than a doe long chased,
Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.
Anew the flames of passion start
Within her; she is sick at heart;
The two friends' compliments she hears
Not, and a flood of bitter tears
With effort she restrains. Well nigh
The poor girl fell into a faint,
But strength of mind and self-restraint
Prevailed at last. She in reply
Said something in an undertone
And at the table sat her down.To tragedy, the fainting fit,
And female tears hysterical,
Oneguine could not now submit,
For long he had endured them all.
Our misanthrope was full of ire,
At a great feast against desire,
And marking Tania's agitation,
Cast down his eyes in trepidation
And sulked in silent indignation;
Swearing how Lenski he would rile,
Avenge himself in proper style.
Triumphant by anticipation,
Caricatures he now designed
Of all the guests within his mind.Certainly not Eugene alone
Tattiana's trouble might have spied,
But that the eyes of every one
By a rich pie were occupied--
Unhappily too salt by far;
And that a bottle sealed with tar
Appeared, Don's effervescing boast,
Between the blanc-mange and the roast;
Behind, of glasses an array,
Tall, slender, like thy form designed,
Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,
Fair object of my guileless lay,
Seductive cup of love, whose flow
Made me so tipsy long ago!
From the moist cork the bottle freed
With loud explosion, the bright wine
Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,
Long tortured by his lay divine,
Triquet arose, and for the bard
The company deep silence guard.
Tania well nigh expired when he
Turned to her and discordantly
Intoned it, manuscript in hand.
Voices and hands applaud, and she
Must bow in common courtesy;
The poet, modest though so grand,
Drank to her health in the first place,
Then handed her the song with grace.Congratulations, toasts resound,
Tattiana thanks to all returned,
But, when Oneguine's turn came round,
The maiden's weary eye which yearned,
Her agitation and distress
Aroused in him some tenderness.
He bowed to her nor silence broke,
But somehow there shone in his look
The witching light of sympathy;
I know not if his heart felt pain
Or if he meant to flirt again,
From habit or maliciously,
But kindness from his eye had beamed
And to revive Tattiana seemed.The chairs are thrust back with a roar,
The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,
As bees who leave their dainty store
And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.
Contented and with victuals stored,
Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,
Matrons unto the fireplace go,
Maids in the corner whisper low;
Behold! green tables are brought forth,
And testy gamesters do engage
In boston and the game of age,
Ombre, and whist all others worth:
A strong resemblance these possess--
All sons of mental weariness.Eight rubbers were already played,
Eight times the heroes of the fight
Change of position had essayed,
When tea was brought. 'Tis my delight
Time to denote by dinner, tea,
And supper. In the country we
Can count the time without much fuss--
The stomach doth admonish us.
And, by the way, I here assert
That for that matter in my verse
As many dinners I rehearse,
As oft to meat and drink advert,
As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,
Whom thirty centuries adore.I will with thy divinity
Contend with knife and fork and platter,
But grant with magnanimity
I'm beaten in another matter;
Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,
Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,
Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,
More advantageously appear
Than cold Oneguine's oddities,
The aspect of a landscape drear.
Or e'en Istomina, my dear,
And fashion's gay frivolities;
But my Tattiana, on my soul,
Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.No one the contrary will urge,
Though for his Helen Menelaus
Again a century should scourge
Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;
Though around honoured Priam's throne
Troy's sages should in concert own
Once more, when she appeared in sight,
Paris and Menelaus right.
But as to fighting--'twill appear!
For patience, reader, I must plead!
A little farther please to read
And be not in advance severe.
There'll be a fight. I do not lie.
My word of honour given have I.The tea, as I remarked, appeared,
But scarce had maids their saucers ta'en
When in the grand saloon was heard
Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.
His soul by crash of music fired,
His tea with rum no more desired,
The Paris of those country parts
To Olga Petoushkova darts:
To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,
A marriageable maid matured,
The poet from Tamboff secured,
Bouyanoff whisked off Poustiakova.
All to the grand saloon are gone--
The ball in all its splendour shone.I tried when I began this tale,,
A ball in Peter's capital,
To sketch ye in Albano's style.
But by fantastic dreams distraught,
My memory wandered wide and sought
The feet of my dear lady friends.
O feet, where'er your path extends
I long enough deceived have erred.
The perfidies I recollect
Should make me much more circumspect,
Reform me both in deed and word,
And this fifth canto ought to be
From such digressions wholly free.
The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,
Undeviating and insane
As giddy youth's hilarity--
Pair after pair the race sustain.
The moment for revenge, meanwhile,
Espying, Eugene with a smile
Approaches Olga and the pair
Amid the company career.
Soon the maid on a chair he seats,
Begins to talk of this and that,
But when two minutes she had sat,
Again the giddy waltz repeats.
All are amazed; but Lenski he
Scarce credits what his eyes can see.Hark! the mazurka. In times past,
When the mazurka used to peal,
All rattled in the ball-room vast,
The parquet cracked beneath the heel,
And jolting jarred the window-frames.
'Tis not so now. Like gentle dames
We glide along a floor of wax.
However, the mazurka lacks
Nought of its charms original
In country towns, where still it keeps
Its stamping, capers and high leaps.
Fashion is there immutable,
Who tyrannizes us with ease,
Of modern Russians the disease.Bouyanoff, wrathful cousin mine,
Unto the hero of this lay
Olga and Tania led. Malign,
Oneguine Olga bore away.
Gliding in negligent career,
He bending whispered in her ear
Some madrigal not worth a rush,
And pressed her hand--the crimson blush
Upon her cheek by adulation
Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath
Seen all, beside himself with wrath,
And hot with jealous indignation,
Till the mazurka's close he stays,
Her hand for the cotillon prays.
She fears she cannot.--Cannot? Why?--
She promised Eugene, or she would
With great delight.--O God on high!
Heard he the truth? And thus she could--
And can it be? But late a child
And now a fickle flirt and wild,
Cunning already to display
And well-instructed to betray!
Lenski the stroke could not sustain,
At womankind he growled a curse,
Departed, ordered out his horse
And galloped home. But pistols twain,
A pair of bullets--nought beside--
His fate shall presently decide.
Having remarked Vladimir's flight,
Oneguine, bored to death again,
By Olga stood, dejected quite
And satisfied with vengeance ta'en.
Olga began to long likewise
For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,
And endless the cotillon seemed
As if some troubled dream she dreamed.
'Tis done. To supper they proceed.
Bedding is laid out and to all
Assigned a lodging, from the hall
Up to the attic, and all need
Tranquil repose. Eugene alone
To pass the night at home hath gone.
All slumber. In the drawing-room
Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff
With better half as cumbersome;
Gvozdine, Bouyanoff, Petoushkoff
And Flianoff, somewhat indisposed,
On chairs in the saloon reposed,
Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet
In jersey and in nightcap lay.
In Olga's and Tattiana's rooms
Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,
Except one by the window placed
Whom pale Diana's ray illumes--
My poor Tattiana cannot sleep
But stares into the darkness deep.
His visit she had not awaited,
His momentary loving glance
Her inmost soul had penetrated,
And his strange conduct at the dance
With Olga; nor of this appeared
An explanation: she was scared,
Alarmed by jealous agonies:
A hand of ice appeared to seize
Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit
Beneath her roaring opened wide:
"I shall expire," Tattiana cried,
"But death from him will be delight.
I murmur not! Why mournfulness?
He _cannot_ give me happiness."
Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!
A new acquaintance we must scan.
There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,
Vladimir's property, a man
Who thrives this moment as I write,
A philosophic anchorite:
Zaretski, once a bully bold,
A gambling troop when he controlled,
Chief rascal, pot-house president,
Now of a family the head,
Simple and kindly and unwed,
True friend, landlord benevolent,
Yea! and a man of honour, lo!
How perfect doth our epoch grow!
Time was the flattering voice of fame,
His ruffian bravery adored,
And true, his pistol's faultless aim
An ace at fifteen paces bored.
But I must add to what I write
That, tipsy once in actual fight,
He from his Kalmuck horse did leap
In mud and mire to wallow deep,
Drunk as a fly; and thus the French
A valuable hostage gained,
A modern Regulus unchained,
Who to surrender did not blench
That every morn at Verrey's cost
Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.
Time was, his raillery was gay,
He loved the simpleton to mock,
To make wise men the idiot play
Openly or 'neath decent cloak.
Yet sometimes this or that deceit
Encountered punishment complete,
And sometimes into snares as well
Himself just like a greenhorn fell.
He could in disputation shine
With pungent or obtuse retort,
At times to silence would resort,
At times talk nonsense with design;
Quarrels among young friends he bred
And to the field of honour led;
Or reconciled them, it may be,
And all the three to breakfast went;
Then he'd malign them secretly
With jest and gossip gaily blent.
_Sed alia tempora_. And bravery
Diminishes as years decline.
But, as I said, Zaretski mine
Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,
From storms protection having sought,
Lived as a really wise man ought,
Like Horace, planted cabbages,
Both ducks and geese in plenty bred
And lessons to his children read.
He was no fool, and Eugene mine,
To friendship making no pretence,
Admired his judgment, which was fine,
Pervaded with much common sense.
He usually was glad to see
The man and liked his company,
So, when he came next day to call,
Was not surprised thereby at all.
But, after mutual compliments,
Zaretski with a knowing grin,
Ere conversation could begin,
The epistle from the bard presents.
Oneguine to the window went
And scanned in silence its content.
It was a cheery, generous
Cartel, or challenge to a fight,
Whereto in language courteous
Lenski his comrade did invite.
Oneguine, by first impulse moved,
Turned and replied as it behoved,
Curtly announcing for the fray
That he was "ready any day."
Zaretski rose, nor would explain,
He cared no longer there to stay,
Had much to do at home that day,
And so departed. But Eugene,
The matter by his conscience tried,
Was with himself dissatisfied.In fact, the subject analysed,
Within that secret court discussed,
In much his conduct stigmatized;
For, from the outset, 'twas unjust
To jest as he had done last eve,
A timid, shrinking love to grieve.
And ought he not to disregard
The poet's madness? for 'tis hard
At eighteen not to play the fool!
Sincerely loving him, Eugene
Assuredly should not have been
Conventionality's dull tool--
Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,
But man of sense and probity.He might his motives have narrated,
Not bristled up like a wild beast,
He ought to have conciliated
That youthful heart--"But, now at least,
The opportunity is flown.
Besides, a duellist well-known
Hath mixed himself in the affair,
Malicious and a slanderer.
Undoubtedly, disdain alone
Should recompense his idle jeers,
But fools--their calumnies and sneers"--
Behold! the world's opinion!
Our idol, Honour's motive force,
Round which revolves the universe.
Impatient, boiling o'er with wrath,
The bard his answer waits at home,
But lo! his braggart neighbour hath
Triumphant with the answer come.
Now for the jealous youth what joy!
He feared the criminal might try
To treat the matter as a jest,
Use subterfuge, and thus his breast
From the dread pistol turn away.
But now all doubt was set aside,
Unto the windmill he must ride
To-morrow before break of day,
To cock the pistol; barrel bend
On thigh or temple, friend on friend.Resolved the flirt to cast away,
The foaming Lenski would refuse,
To see his Olga ere the fray--
His watch, the sun in turn he views--
Finally tost his arms in air
And lo! he is already there!
He deemed his coming would inspire
Olga with trepidation dire.
He was deceived. Just as before
The miserable bard to meet,
As hope uncertain and as sweet,
Olga ran skipping from the door.
She was as heedless and as gay--
Well! just as she was yesterday."Why did you leave last night so soon?"
Was the first question Olga made,
Lenski, into confusion thrown,
All silently hung down his head.
Jealousy and vexation took
To flight before her radiant look,
Before such fond simplicity
And mental elasticity.
He eyed her with a fond concern,
Perceived that he was still beloved,
Already by repentance moved
To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;
But trembles, words he cannot find,
Delighted, almost sane in mind.But once more pensive and distressed
Beside his Olga doth he grieve,
Nor enough strength of mind possessed
To mention the foregoing eve,
He mused: "I will her saviour be!
With ardent sighs and flattery
The vile seducer shall not dare
The freshness of her heart impair,
Nor shall the caterpillar come
The lily's stem to eat away,
Nor shall the bud of yesterday
Perish when half disclosed its bloom!"--
All this, my friends, translate aright:
"I with my friend intend to fight!"If he had only known the wound
Which rankled in Tattiana's breast,
And if Tattiana mine had found--
If the poor maiden could have guessed
That the two friends with morning's light
Above the yawning grave would fight,--
Ah! it may be, affection true
Had reconciled the pair anew!
But of this love, e'en casually,
As yet none had discovered aught;
Eugene of course related nought,
Tattiana suffered secretly;
Her nurse, who could have made a guess,
Was famous for thick-headedness.Lenski that eve in thought immersed,
Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,
But he who by the Muse was nursed
Is ever thus. With frowning brow
To the pianoforte he moves
And various chords upon it proves,
Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:
"I'm happy, say, is it not so?"--
But it grew late; he must not stay;
Heavy his heart with anguish grew;
To the young girl he said adieu,
As it were, tore himself away.
Gazing into his face, she said:
"What ails thee?"--"Nothing."--He is fled.At home arriving he addressed
His care unto his pistols' plight,
Replaced them in their box, undressed
And Schiller read by candlelight.
But one thought only filled his mind,
His mournful heart no peace could find,
Olga he sees before his eyes
Miraculously fair arise,
Vladimir closes up his book,
And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit
With lovers' rubbish filled, was neat
And flowed harmoniously. He took
And spouted it with lyric fire--
Like D when dinner doth inspire.Destiny hath preserved his lay.
I have it. Lo! the very thing!
"Oh! whither have ye winged your way,
Ye golden days of my young spring?
What will the coming dawn reveal?
In vain my anxious eyes appeal;
In mist profound all yet is hid.
So be it! Just the laws which bid
The fatal bullet penetrate,
Or innocently past me fly.
Good governs all! The hour draws nigh
Of life or death predestinate.
Blest be the labours of the light,
And blest the shadows of the night."To-morrow's dawn will glimmer gray,
Bright day will then begin to burn,
But the dark sepulchre I may
Have entered never to return.
The memory of the bard, a dream,
Will be absorbed by Lethe's stream;
Men will forget me, but my urn
To visit, lovely maid, return,
O'er my remains to drop a tear,
And think: here lies who loved me well,
For consecrate to me he fell
In the dawn of existence drear.
Maid whom my heart desires alone,
Approach, approach; I am thine own."Thus in a style _obscure_ and _stale_,
He wrote ('tis the romantic style,
Though of romance therein I fail
To see aught--never mind meanwhile)
And about dawn upon his breast
His weary head declined at rest,
For o'er a word to fashion known,
"Ideal," he had drowsy grown.
But scarce had sleep's soft witchery
Subdued him, when his neighbour stept
Into the chamber where he slept
And wakened him with the loud cry:
"'Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.
Oneguine waits on us, 'tis like."
He was in error; for Eugene
Was sleeping then a sleep like death;
The pall of night was growing thin,
To Lucifer the cock must breathe
His song, when still he slumbered deep,
The sun had mounted high his steep,
A passing snowstorm wreathed away
With pallid light, but Eugene lay
Upon his couch insensibly;
Slumber still o'er him lingering flies.
But finally he oped his eyes
And turned aside the drapery;
He gazed upon the clock which showed
He long should have been on the road.He rings in haste; in haste arrives
His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,
Who dressing-gown and slippers gives
And linen on him doth bestow.
Dressing as quickly as he can,
Eugene directs the trusty man
To accompany him and to escort
A box of terrible import.
Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:
He enters: to the mill he drives:
Descends, the order Guillot gives,
The fatal tubes Lepage contrived
To bring behind: the triple steeds
To two young oaks the coachman leads.
Lenski the foeman's apparition
Leaning against the dam expects,
Zaretski, village mechanician,
In the meantime the mill inspects.
Oneguine his excuses says;
"But," cried Zaretski in amaze,
"Your second you have left behind!"
A duellist of classic mind,
Method was dear unto his heart
He would not that a man ye slay
In a lax or informal way,
But followed the strict rules of art,
And ancient usages observed
."My second!" cried in turn Eugene,
"Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;
To this arrangement can be seen,
No obstacle of which I know.
Although unknown to fame mayhap,
He's a straightforward little chap."
Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,
But to Vladimir Eugene saith:
"Shall we commence?"--"Let it be so,"
Lenski replied, and soon they be
Behind the mill. Meantime ye see
Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot
In consultation stand aside--
The foes with downcast eyes abide.Foes! Is it long since friendship rent
Asunder was and hate prepared?
Since leisure was together spent,
Meals, secrets, occupations shared?
Now, like hereditary foes,
Malignant fury they disclose,
As in some frenzied dream of fear
These friends cold-bloodedly draw near
Mutual destruction to contrive.
Cannot they amicably smile
Ere crimson stains their hands defile,
Depart in peace and friendly live?
But fashionable hatred's flame
Trembles at artificial shame.The shining pistols are uncased,
The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,
Bullets are down the barrels pressed,
For the first time the hammer clicks.
Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,
The powder in the pan is laid,
The sharp flint, screwed securely on,
Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,
Guillot behind a pollard stood;
Aside the foes their mantles threw,
Zaretski paces thirty-two
Measured with great exactitude.
At each extreme one takes his stand,
A loaded pistol in his hand."Advance!"--
    Indifferent and sedate,
The foes, as yet not taking aim,
With measured step and even gait
Athwart the snow four paces came--
Four deadly paces do they span;
Oneguine slowly then began
To raise his pistol to his eye,
Though he advanced unceasingly.
And lo! five paces more they pass,
And Lenski, closing his left eye,
Took aim--but as immediately
Oneguine fired--Alas! alas!
The poet's hour hath sounded--See!
He drops his pistol silently.He on his bosom gently placed
His hand, and fell. His clouded eye
Not agony, but death expressed.
So from the mountain lazily
The avalanche of snow first bends,
Then glittering in the sun descends.
The cold sweat bursting from his brow,
To the youth Eugene hurried now--
Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!
He was no more! The youthful bard
For evermore had disappeared.
The storm was hushed. The blossom fair
Was withered ere the morning light--
The altar flame was quenched in night.Tranquil he lay, and strange to view
The peace which on his forehead beamed,
His breast was riddled through and through,
The blood gushed from the wound and steamed
Ere this but one brief moment beat
That heart with inspiration sweet
And enmity and hope and love--
The blood boiled and the passions strove.
Now, as in a deserted house,
All dark and silent hath become;
The inmate is for ever dumb,
The windows whitened, shutters close--
Whither departed is the host?
God knows! The very trace is lost.'Tis sweet the foe to aggravate
With epigrams impertinent,
Sweet to behold him obstinate,
His butting horns in anger bent,
The glass unwittingly inspect
And blush to own himself reflect.
Sweeter it is, my friends, if he
Howl like a dolt: 'tis meant for me!
But sweeter still it is to arrange
For him an honourable grave,
At his pale brow a shot to have,
Placed at the customary range;
But home his body to despatch
Can scarce in sweetness be a match.Well, if your pistol ball by chance
The comrade of your youth should strike,
Who by a haughty word or glance
Or any trifle else ye like
You o'er your wine insulted hath--
Or even overcome by wrath
Scornfully challenged you afield--
Tell me, of sentiments concealed
Which in your spirit dominates,
When motionless your gaze beneath
He lies, upon his forehead death,
And slowly life coagulates--
When deaf and silent he doth lie
Heedless of your despairing cry?Eugene, his pistol yet in hand
And with remorseful anguish filled,
Gazing on Lenski's corse did stand--
Zaretski shouted: "Why, he's killed!"--
Killed! at this dreadful exclamation
Oneguine went with trepidation
And the attendants called in haste.
Most carefully Zaretski placed
Within his sledge the stiffened corse,
And hurried home his awful freight.
Conscious of death approximate,
Loud paws the earth each panting horse,
His bit with foam besprinkled o'er,
And homeward like an arrow tore.My friends, the poet ye regret!
When hope's delightful flower but bloomed
In bud of promise incomplete,
The manly toga scarce assumed,
He perished. Where his troubled dreams,
And where the admirable streams
Of youthful impulse, reverie,
Tender and elevated, free?
And where tempestuous love's desires,
The thirst of knowledge and of fame,
Horror of sinfulness and shame,
Imagination's sacred fires,
Ye shadows of a life more high,
Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?Perchance to benefit mankind,
Or but for fame he saw the light;
His lyre, to silence now consigned,
Resounding through all ages might
Have echoed to eternity.
With worldly honours, it may be,
Fortune the poet had repaid.
It may be that his martyred shade
Carried a truth divine away;
That, for the century designed,
Had perished a creative mind,
And past the threshold of decay,
He ne'er shall hear Time's eulogy,
The blessings of humanity.Or, it may be, the bard had passed
A life in common with the rest;
Vanished his youthful years at last,
The fire extinguished in his breast,
In many things had changed his life--
The Muse abandoned, ta'en a wife,
Inhabited the country, clad
In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:
A life of fact, not fiction, led--
At forty suffered from the gout,
Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:
And finally, upon his bed
Had finished life amid his sons,
Doctors and women, sobs and groans.But, howsoe'er his lot were cast,
Alas! the youthful lover slain,
Poetical enthusiast,
A friendly hand thy life hath ta'en!
There is a spot the village near
Where dwelt the Muses' worshipper,
Two pines have joined their tangled roots,
A rivulet beneath them shoots
Its waters to the neighbouring vale.
There the tired ploughman loves to lie,
The reaping girls approach and ply
Within its wave the sounding pail,
And by that shady rivulet
A simple tombstone hath been set.There, when the rains of spring we mark
Upon the meadows showering,
The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,
Of Volga fishermen doth sing,
And the young damsel from the town,
For summer to the country flown,
Whene'er across the plain at speed
Alone she gallops on her steed,
Stops at the tomb in passing by;
The tightened leathern rein she draws,
Aside she casts her veil of gauze
And reads with rapid eager eye
The simple epitaph--a tear
Doth in her gentle eye appear.
And meditative from the spot
She leisurely away doth ride,
Spite of herself with Lenski's lot
Longtime her mind is occupied.
She muses: "What was Olga's fate?
Longtime was her heart desolate
Or did her tears soon cease to flow?
And where may be her sister now?
Where is the outlaw, banned by men,
Of fashionable dames the foe,
The misanthrope of gloomy brow,
By whom the youthful bard was slain?"--
In time I'll give ye without fail
A true account and in detail.But not at present, though sincerely
I on my chosen hero dote;
Though I'll return to him right early,
Just at this moment I cannot.
Years have inclined me to stern prose,
Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,
And now, I mournfully confess,
In rhyming I show laziness.
As once, to fill the rapid page
My pen no longer finds delight,
Other and colder thoughts affright,
Sterner solicitudes engage,
In worldly din or solitude
Upon my visions such intrude.Fresh aspirations I have known,
I am acquainted with fresh care,
Hopeless are all the first, I own,
Yet still remains the old despair.
Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?
Where youth ?
And is it true her garland bright
At last is shrunk and withered quite?
And is it true and not a jest,
Not even a poetic phrase,
That vanished are my youthful days,
Never for me to reappear--
That soon I reach my thirtieth year?And so my noon hath come! If so,
I must resign myself, in sooth;
Yet let us part in friendship, O
My frivolous and jolly youth.
I thank thee for thy joyfulness,
Love's tender transports and distress,
For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,
And all that from thy hand proceeds--
I thank thee. In thy company,
With tumult or contentment still
Of thy delights I drank my fill,
Enough! with tranquil spirit I
Commence a new career in life
And rest from bygone days of strife.But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,
Where my days in the wilderness
Of languor and of love did tell
And contemplative dreaminess;
And thou, youth's early inspiration,
Invigorate imagination
And spur my spirit's torpid mood!
Fly frequent to my solitude,
Let not the poet's spirit freeze,
Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,
Eventually petrify
In the world's mortal revelries,
Amid the soulless sons of pride
And glittering simpletons beside;Amid sly, pusillanimous
Spoiled children most degenerate
And tiresome rogues ridiculous
And stupid censors passionate;
Amid coquettes who pray to God
And abject slaves who kiss the rod;
In haunts of fashion where each day
All with urbanity betray,
Where harsh frivolity proclaims
Its cold unfeeling sentences;
Amid the awful emptiness
Of conversation, thought and aims--
In that morass where you and I
Wallow, my friends, in company!
Moscow
Moscow, Russia's darling daughter,
Where thine equal shall we find?
                    Dmitrieff
Who can help loving mother Moscow?
            Baratynski
A journey to Moscow! To see the world!
Where better?
        Where man is not.
    Griboyedoff
Impelled by Spring's dissolving beams,
The snows from off the hills around
Descended swift in turbid streams
And flooded all the level ground.
A smile from slumbering nature clear
Did seem to greet the youthful year;
The heavens shone in deeper blue,
The woods, still naked to the view,
Seemed in a haze of green embowered.
The bee forth from his cell of wax
Flew to collect his rural tax;
The valleys dried and gaily flowered;
Herds low, and under night's dark veil
Already sings the nightingale.
Mournful is thine approach to me,
O Spring, thou chosen time of love!
What agitation languidly
My spirit and my blood doth move,
What sad emotions o'er me steal
When first upon my cheek I feel
The breath of Spring again renewed,
Secure in rural quietude--
Or, strange to me is happiness?
Do all things which to mirth incline.
And make a dark existence shine
Inflict annoyance and distress
Upon a soul inert and cloyed?--
And is all light within destroyed?
Or, heedless of the leaves' return
Which Autumn late to earth consigned,
Do we alone our losses mourn
Of which the rustling woods remind?
Or, when anew all Nature teems,
Do we foresee in troubled dreams
The coming of life's Autumn drear.
For which no springtime shall appear?
Or, it may be, we inly seek,
Wafted upon poetic wing,
Some other long-departed Spring,
Whose memories make the heart beat quick
With thoughts of a far distant land,
Of a strange night when the moon and--
'Tis now the season! Idlers all,
Epicurean philosophers,
Ye men of fashion cynical,
Of Levshin's school ye followers,
Priams of country populations
And dames of fine organisations,
Spring summons you to her green bowers,
'Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;
The time for mystic strolls which late
Into the starry night extend.
Quick to the country let us wend
In vehicles surcharged with freight;
In coach or post-cart duly placed
Beyond the city-barriers haste.Thou also, reader generous,
The chaise long ordered please employ,
Abandon cities riotous,
Which in the winter were a joy:
The Muse capricious let us coax,
Go hear the rustling of the oaks
Beside a nameless rivulet,
Where in the country Eugene yet,
An idle anchorite and sad,
A while ago the winter spent,
Near young Tattiana resident,
My pretty self-deceiving maid--
No more the village knows his face,
For there he left a mournful trace.
Let us proceed unto a rill,
Which in a hilly neighbourhood
Seeks, winding amid meadows still,
The river through the linden wood.
The nightingale there all night long,
Spring's paramour, pours forth her song
The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,
And lo! where lies a marble tomb
And two old pines their branches spread--
"_Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,
Who early died a gallant death_,"
Thereon the passing traveller read:
"_The date, his fleeting years how long--
Repose in peace, thou child of song_."
Time was, the breath of early dawn
Would agitate a mystic wreath
Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn
Above the humble urn of death.
Time was, two maidens from their home
At eventide would hither come,
And, by the light the moonbeams gave,
Lament, embrace upon that grave.
But now--none heeds the monument
Of woe: effaced the pathway now:
There is no wreath upon the bough:
Alone beside it, gray and bent,
As formerly the shepherd sits
And his poor basten sandal knits.
My poor Vladimir, bitter tears
Thee but a little space bewept,
Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,
Nor true unto her sorrow kept.
Another could her heart engage,
Another could her woe assuage
By flattery and lover's art--
A lancer captivates her heart!
A lancer her soul dotes upon:
Before the altar, lo! the pair,
Mark ye with what a modest air
She bows her head beneath the crown;
Behold her downcast eyes which glow,
Her lips where light smiles come and go!
My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,
Passed into dull eternity,
Was the sad poet filled with gloom,
Hearing the fatal perfidy?
Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,
Hath the bard, by indifference blest,
Callous to all on earth become--
Is the world to him sealed and dumb?
The same unmoved oblivion
On us beyond the grave attends,
The voice of lovers, foes and friends,
Dies suddenly: of heirs alone
Remains on earth the unseemly rage,
Whilst struggling for the heritage.Soon Olga's accents shrill resound
No longer through her former home;
The lancer, to his calling bound,
Back to his regiment must roam.
The aged mother, bathed in tears,
Distracted by her grief appears
When the hour came to bid good-bye--
But my Tattiana's eyes were dry.
Only her countenance assumed
A deadly pallor, air distressed;
When all around the entrance pressed,
To say farewell, and fussed and fumed
Around the carriage of the pair--
Tattiana gently led them there.And long her eyes as through a haze
After the wedded couple strain;
Alas! the friend of childish days
Away, Tattiana, hath been ta'en.
Thy dove, thy darling little pet
On whom a sister's heart was set
Afar is borne by cruel fate,
For evermore is separate.
She wanders aimless as a sprite,
Into the tangled garden goes
But nowhere can she find repose,
Nor even tears afford respite,
Of consolation all bereft--
Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.In cruel solitude each day
With flame more ardent passion burns,
And to Oneguine far away
Her heart importunately turns.
She never more his face may view,
For was it not her duty to
Detest him for a brother slain?
The poet fell; already men
No more remembered him; unto
Another his betrothed was given;
The memory of the bard was driven
Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;
Two hearts perchance were desolate
And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?'Twas eve. 'Twas dusk. The river speeds
In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.
Already dance to song proceeds;
The fisher's fire afar illumes
The river's bank. Tattiana lone
Beneath the silver of the moon
Long time in meditation deep
Her path across the plain doth keep--
Proceeds, until she from a hill
Sees where a noble mansion stood,
A village and beneath, a wood,
A garden by a shining rill.
She gazed thereon, and instant beat
Her heart more loudly and more fleet.She hesitates, in doubt is thrown--
"Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?
He is not there: I am not known:
The house and garden I would see."
Tattiana from the hill descends
With bated breath, around she bends
A countenance perplexed and scared.
She enters a deserted yard--
Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,
But at her shriek ran forth with noise
The household troop of little boys,
Who with a scuffle and a shout
The curs away to kennel chase,
The damsel under escort place."Can I inspect the mansion, please?"
Tattiana asks, and hurriedly
Unto Anicia for the keys
The family of children hie.
Anicia soon appears, the door
Opens unto her visitor.
Into the lonely house she went,
Wherein a space Oneguine spent.
She gazed--a cue, forgotten long,
Doth on the billiard table rest,
Upon the tumbled sofa placed,
A riding whip. She strolls along.
The beldam saith: "The hearth, by it
The master always used to sit."Departed Lenski here to dine
In winter time would often come.
Please follow this way, lady mine,
This is my master's sitting-room.
'Tis here he slept, his coffee took,
Into accounts would sometimes look,
A book at early morn perused.
The room my former master used.
On Sundays by yon window he,
Spectacles upon nose, all day
Was wont with me at cards to play.
God save his soul eternally
And grant his weary bones their rest
Deep in our mother Earth's chill breast!"Tattiana's eyes with tender gleam
On everything around her gaze,
Of priceless value all things seem
And in her languid bosom raise
A pleasure though with sorrow knit:
The table with its lamp unlit,
The pile of books, with carpet spread
Beneath the window-sill his bed,
The landscape which the moonbeams fret,
The twilight pale which softens all,
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall
And the cast-iron statuette
With folded arms and eyes bent low,
Cocked hat and melancholy brow.
Long in this fashionable cell
Tattiana as enchanted stood;
But it grew late; cold blew the gale;
Dark was the valley and the wood
Slept o'er the river misty grown.
Behind the mountain sank the moon.
Long, long the hour had past when home
Our youthful wanderer should roam.
She hid the trouble of her breast,
Heaved an involuntary sigh
And turned to leave immediately,
But first permission did request
Thither in future to proceed
That certain volumes she might read.Adieu she to the matron said
At the front gates, but in brief space
At early morn returns the maid
To the abandoned dwelling-place.
When in the study's calm retreat,
Wrapt in oblivion complete,
She found herself alone at last,
Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;
But presently she tried to read;
At first for books was disinclined,
But soon their choice seemed to her mind
Remarkable. She then indeed
Devoured them with an eager zest.
A new world was made manifest!Although we know that Eugene had
Long ceased to be a reading man,
Still certain authors, I may add,
He had excepted from the ban:
The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
With it may be a couple more;
Romances three, in which ye scan
Portrayed contemporary man
As the reflection of his age,
His immorality of mind
To arid selfishness resigned,
A visionary personage
With his exasperated sense,
His energy and impotence.And numerous pages had preserved
The sharp incisions of his nail,
And these the attentive maid observed
With eye precise and without fail.
Tattiana saw with trepidation
By what idea or observation
Oneguine was the most impressed,
In what he merely acquiesced.
Upon those margins she perceived
Oneguine's pencillings. His mind
Made revelations undesigned,
Of what he thought and what believed,
A dagger, asterisk, or note
Interrogation to denote.And my Tattiana now began
To understand by slow degrees
More clearly, God be praised, the man,
Whom autocratic fate's decrees
Had bid her sigh for without hope--
A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,
Being from hell or heaven sent,
Angel or fiend malevolent.
Which is he? or an imitation,
A bogy conjured up in joke,
A Russian in Childe Harold's cloak,
Of foreign whims the impersonation--
Handbook of fashionable phrase
Or parody of modern ways?Hath she found out the riddle yet?
Hath she a fitting phrase selected?
But time flies and she doth forget
They long at home have her expected--
Whither two neighbouring dames have walked
And a long time about her talked.
"What can be done? She is no child!"
Cried the old dame with anguish filled:
"Olinka is her junior, see.
'Tis time to marry her, 'tis true,
But tell me what am I to do?
To all she answers cruelly--
I will not wed, and ever weeps
And lonely through the forest creeps.""Is she in love?" quoth one. "With whom?
Bouyanoff courted. She refused.
Petoushkoff met the selfsame doom.
The hussar Pykhtin was accused.
How the young imp on Tania doted!
To captivate her how devoted!
I mused: perhaps the matter's squared--
O yes! my hopes soon disappeared."
"But, _matushka_, to Moscow you
Should go, the market for a maid,
With many a vacancy, 'tis said."--
"Alas! my friend, no revenue!"
"Enough to see one winter's end;
If not, the money I will lend."
The venerable dame opined
The counsel good and full of reason,
Her money counted, and designed
To visit Moscow in the season.
Tattiana learns the intelligence--
Of her provincial innocence
The unaffected traits she now
Unto a carping world must show--
Her toilette's antiquated style,
Her antiquated mode of speech,
For Moscow fops and Circes each
To mark with a contemptuous smile.
Horror! had she not better stay
Deep in the greenwood far away?Arising with the morning's light,
Unto the fields she makes her way,
And with emotional delight
Surveying them, she thus doth say:
"Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!
Ye well-known mountain summits high,
Ye groves whose depths I know so well,
Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!
Delicious nature, thee I fly,
The calm existence which I prize
I yield for splendid vanities,
Thou too farewell, my liberty!
Whither and wherefore do I speed
And what will Destiny concede?"Farther Tattiana's walks extend--
'Tis now the hillock now the rill
Their natural attractions lend
To stay the maid against her will.
She the acquaintances she loves,
Her spacious fields and shady groves,
Another visit hastes to pay.
But Summer swiftly fades away
And golden Autumn draweth nigh,
And pallid nature trembling grieves,
A victim decked with golden leaves;
Dark clouds before the north wind fly;
It blew: it howled: till winter e'en
Came forth in all her magic sheen.The snow descends and buries all,
Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,
A white and undulating pall
O'er hillock and o'er meadow throws.
The channel of the river stilled
As if with eider-down is filled.
The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice
In mother Winter's strange caprice.
But Tania's heart is not at ease,
Winter's approach she doth not hail
Nor the frost particles inhale
Nor the first snow of winter seize
Her shoulders, breast and face to lave--
Alarm the winter journey gave.The date was fixed though oft postponed,
But ultimately doth approach.
Examined, mended, newly found
Was the old and forgotten coach;
Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,
The household property contain:
Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,
Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,
Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,
Basins and jugs--well! everything
To happiness contributing.
Behold! beside their dwelling groups
Of serfs the farewell wail have given.
Nags eighteen to the door are driven.
These to the coach of state are bound,
Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,
Baggage is heaped up in a mound,
Old women at the coachmen swear.
A bearded postillion astride
A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,
Unto the gates the servants fly
To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.
These take their seats; the coach of state
Leisurely through the gateway glides.
"Adieu! thou home where peace abides,
Where turmoil cannot penetrate,
Shall I behold thee once again?"--
Tattiana tears cannot restrain.The limits of enlightenment
When to enlarge we shall succeed,
In course of time (the whole extent
Will not five centuries exceed
By computation) it is like
Our roads transformed the eye will strike;
Highways all Russia will unite
And form a network left and right;
On iron bridges we shall gaze
Which o'er the waters boldly leap,
Mountains we'll level and through deep
Streams excavate subaqueous ways,
And Christian folk will, I expect,
An inn at every stage erect.But now, what wretched roads one sees,
Our bridges long neglected rot,
And at the stages bugs and fleas
One moment's slumber suffer not.
Inns there are none. Pretentious but
Meagre, within a draughty hut,
A bill of fare hangs full in sight
And irritates the appetite.
Meantime a Cyclops of those parts
Before a fire which feebly glows
Mends with the Russian hammer's blows
The flimsy wares of Western marts,
With blessings on the ditches and
The ruts of his own fatherland.Yet on a frosty winter day
The journey in a sledge doth please,
No senseless fashionable lay
Glides with a more luxurious ease;
For our Automedons are fire
And our swift troikas never tire;
The verst posts catch the vacant eye
And like a palisade flit by.
The Larinas unwisely went,
From apprehension of the cost,
By their own horses, not the post--
So Tania to her heart's content
Could taste the pleasures of the road.
Seven days and nights the travellers plod.
But they draw near. Before them, lo!
White Moscow raises her old spires,
Whose countless golden crosses glow
As with innumerable fires.
Ah! brethren, what was my delight
When I yon semicircle bright
Of churches, gardens, belfries high
Descried before me suddenly!
Moscow, how oft in evil days,
Condemned to exile dire by fate,
On thee I used to meditate!
Moscow! How much is in the phrase
For every loyal Russian breast!
How much is in that word expressed!
Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,
Petrovski Palace! Gloomily
His recent glory he invokes.
Here, drunk with his late victory,
Napoleon tarried till it please
Moscow approach on bended knees,
Time-honoured Kremlin's keys present.
Not so! My Moscow never went
To seek him out with bended head.
No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,
But lights incendiary flames
For the impatient chief instead.
From hence engrossed in thought profound
He on the conflagration frowned.
Adieu, thou witness of our glory,
Petrovski Palace; come, astir!
Drive on! the city barriers hoary
Appear; along the road of Tver
The coach is borne o'er ruts and holes,
Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,
Past palaces and nunneries,
Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,
Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,
Boulevards, belfries, milliners,
Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers
And fashionable magazines,
Balconies, lion's heads on doors,
Jackdaws on every spire--in scores.
The weary way still incomplete,
An hour passed by--another--till,
Near Khariton's in a side street
The coach before a house stood still.
At an old aunt's they had arrived
Who had for four long years survived
An invalid from lung complaint.
A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent
And spectacles, his knitting staid
And the saloon threw open wide;
The princess from the sofa cried
And the newcomers welcome bade.
The two old ladies then embraced
And exclamations interlaced."Princesse, mon ange!"--"Pachette!"--
"Aline!"
"Who would have thought it? As of yore!
Is it for long?"--"Ma chere cousine!"
"Sit down. How funny, to be sure!
'Tis a scene of romance, I vow!"
"Tania, my eldest child, you know"--
"Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!
Is it a dream, and can it be?
Cousin, rememb'rest Grandison?"
"What! Grandison?"--"Yes, certainly!"
"Oh! I remember, where is he?"--
"Here, he resides with Simeon.
He called upon me Christmas Eve--
His son is married, just conceive!""And he--but of him presently--
To-morrow Tania we will show,
What say you? to the family--
Alas! abroad I cannot go.
See, I can hardly crawl about--
But you must both be quite tired out!
Let us go seek a little rest--
Ah! I'm so weak--my throbbing breast!
Oppressive now is happiness,
Not only sorrow--Ah! my dear,
Now I am fit for nothing here.
In old age life is weariness!"
Then weeping she sank back distressed
And fits of coughing racked her chest.By the sick lady's gaiety
And kindness Tania was impressed,
But, her own room in memory,
The strange apartment her oppressed:
Repose her silken curtains fled,
She could not sleep in her new bed.
The early tinkling of the bells
Which of approaching labour tells
Aroused Tattiana from her bed.
The maiden at her casement sits
As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,
But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead--
Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,
A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.To consanguineous dinners they
Conduct Tattiana constantly,
That grandmothers and grandsires may
Contemplate her sad reverie.
We Russians, friends from distant parts
Ever receive with kindly hearts
And exclamations and good cheer.
"How Tania grows! Doth it appear
Long since I held thee at the font--
Since in these arms I thee did bear--
And since I pulled thee by the ear--
And I to give thee cakes was wont?"--
Then the old dames in chorus sing,
"Oh! how our years are vanishing!"But nothing changed in them is seen,
All in the good old style appears,
Our dear old aunt, Princess Helene,
Her cap of tulle still ever wears:
Luceria Lvovna paint applies,
Amy Petrovna  utters lies,
Ivan Petrovitch still a gaby,
Simeon Petrovitch just as shabby;
Pelagie Nikolavna has
Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,
Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;
Still of his club he member was--
As deaf and silly doth remain,
Still eats and drinks enough for twain.Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.
In the beginning, cold and mute,
Moscow's young Graces at her stare,
Examine her from head to foot.
They deem her somewhat finical,
Outlandish and provincial,
A trifle pale, a trifle lean,
But plainer girls they oft had seen.
Obedient then to Nature's law,
With her they did associate,
Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;
Her tresses curled in fashion saw,
And oft in whispers would impart
A maiden's secrets--of the heart.Triumphs--their own or those of friends--
Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment
Their harmless conversation blends
With scandal's trivial ornament.
Then to reward such confidence
Her amorous experience
With mute appeal to ask they seem--
But Tania just as in a dream
Without participation hears,
Their voices nought to her impart
And the lone secret of her heart,
Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,
She buries deep within her breast
Nor aught confides unto the rest.Tattiana would have gladly heard
The converse of the world polite,
But in the drawing-room all appeared
To find in gossip such delight,
Speech was so tame and colourless
Their slander e'en was weariness;
In their sterility of prattle,
Questions and news and tittle-tattle,
No sense was ever manifest
Though by an error and unsought--
The languid mind could smile at nought,
Heart would not throb albeit in jest--
Even amusing fools we miss
In thee, thou world of empty bliss.In groups, official striplings glance
Conceitedly on Tania fair,
And views amongst themselves advance
Unfavourable unto her.
But one buffoon unhappy deemed
Her the ideal which he dreamed,
And leaning 'gainst the portal closed
To her an elegy composed.
Also one Viazemski, remarking
Tattiana by a poor aunt's side,
Successfully to please her tried,
And an old gent the poet marking
By Tania, smoothing his peruke,
To ask her name the trouble took.
But where Melpomene doth rave
With lengthened howl and accent loud,
And her bespangled robe doth wave
Before a cold indifferent crowd,
And where Thalia softly dreams
And heedless of approval seems,
Terpsichore alone among
Her sisterhood delights the young
(So 'twas with us in former years,
In your young days and also mine),
Never upon my heroine
The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,
The connoisseur his glances throws
From boxes or from stalls in rows.To the assembly her they bear.
There the confusion, pressure, heat,
The crash of music, candles' glare
And rapid whirl of many feet,
The ladies' dresses airy, light,
The motley moving mass and bright,
Young ladies in a vasty curve,
To strike imagination serve.
'Tis there that arrant fops display
Their insolence and waistcoats white
And glasses unemployed all night;
Thither hussars on leave will stray
To clank the spur, delight the fair--
And vanish like a bird in air.Full many a lovely star hath night
And Moscow many a beauty fair:
Yet clearer shines than every light
The moon in the blue atmosphere.
And she to whom my lyre would fain,
Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,
Shines in the female firmament
Like a full moon magnificent.
Lo! with what pride celestial
Her feet the earth beneath her press!
Her heart how full of gentleness,
Her glance how wild yet genial!
Enough, enough, conclude thy lay--
For folly's dues thou hadst to pay.Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,
Gallop, mazurka, waltzing--see!
A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,
Tania, observed by nobody,
Looks upon all with absent gaze
And hates the world's discordant ways.
'Tis noisome to her there: in thought
Again her rural life she sought,
The hamlet, the poor villagers,
The little solitary nook
Where shining runs the tiny brook,
Her garden, and those books of hers,
And the lime alley's twilight dim
Where the first time she met with _him_.Thus widely meditation erred,
Forgot the world, the noisy ball,
Whilst from her countenance ne'er stirred
The eyes of a grave general.
Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,
Each gave Tattiana's arm a nudge
And in a whisper did repeat:
"Look quickly to your left, my sweet!"
"The left? Why, what on earth is there?"--
"No matter, look immediately.
There, in that knot of company,
Two dressed in uniform appear--
Ah! he has gone the other way"--
"Who? Is it that stout general, pray?"--Let us congratulations pay
To our Tattiana conquering,
And for a time our course delay,
That I forget not whom I sing.
Let me explain that in my song
"I celebrate a comrade young
And the extent of his caprice;
O epic Muse, my powers increase
And grant success to labour long;
Having a trusty staff bestowed,
Grant that I err not on the road."
Enough! my pack is now unslung--
To classicism I've homage paid,
Though late, have a beginning made.
The Great World
'Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Still for ever fare thee well.'--Byron
In the Lyceum's noiseless shade
As in a garden when I grew,
I Apuleius gladly read
But would not look at Cicero.
'Twas then in valleys lone, remote,
In spring-time, heard the cygnet's note
By waters shining tranquilly,
That first the Muse appeared to me.
Into the study of the boy
There came a sudden flash of light,
The Muse revealed her first delight,
Sang childhood's pastimes and its joy,
Glory with which our history teems
And the heart's agitated dreams.
And the world met her smilingly,
A first success light pinions gave,
The old Derjavine noticed me,
And blest me, sinking to the grave.
Then my companions young with pleasure
In the unfettered hours of leisure
Her utterances ever heard,
And by a partial temper stirred
And boiling o'er with friendly heat,
They first of all my brow did wreathe
And an encouragement did breathe
That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.
O triumphs of my guileless days,
How sweet a dream your memories raise!
Passion's wild sway I then allowed,
Her promptings unto law did make,
Pursuits I followed of the crowd,
My sportive Muse I used to take
To many a noisy feast and fight,
Terror of guardians of the night;
And wild festivities among
She brought with her the gift of song.
Like a Bacchante in her sport
Beside the cup she sang her rhymes
And the young revellers of past times
Vociferously paid her court,
And I, amid the friendly crowd,
Of my light paramour was proud.
But I abandoned their array,
And fled afar--she followed me.
How oft the kindly Muse away
Hath whiled the road's monotony,
Entranced me by some mystic tale.
How oft beneath the moonbeams pale
Like Leonora did she ride
With me Caucasian rocks beside!
How oft to the Crimean shore
She led me through nocturnal mist
Unto the sounding sea to list,
Where Nereids murmur evermore,
And where the billows hoarsely raise
To God eternal hymns of praise.
Then, the far capital forgot,
Its splendour and its blandishments,
In poor Moldavia cast her lot,
She visited the humble tents
Of migratory gipsy hordes--
And wild among them grew her words--
Our godlike tongue she could exchange
For savage speech, uncouth and strange,
And ditties of the steppe she loved.
But suddenly all changed around!
Lo! in my garden was she found
And as a country damsel roved,
A pensive sorrow in her glance
And in her hand a French romance.
Now for the first time I my Muse
Lead into good society,
Her steppe-like beauties I peruse
With jealous fear, anxiety.
Through dense aristocratic rows
Of diplomats and warlike beaux
And supercilious dames she glides,
Sits down and gazes on all sides--
Amazed at the confusing crowd,
Variety of speech and vests,
Deliberate approach of guests
Who to the youthful hostess bowed,
And the dark fringe of men, like frames
Enclosing pictures of fair dames.
Assemblies oligarchical
Please her by their decorum fixed,
The rigour of cold pride and all
Titles and ages intermixed.
But who in that choice company
With clouded brow stands silently?
Unknown to all he doth appear,
A vision desolate and drear
Doth seem to him the festal scene.
Doth his brow wretchedness declare
Or suffering pride? Why is he there?
Who may he be? Is it Eugene?
Pray is it he? It is the same.
"And is it long since back he came?
"Is he the same or grown more wise?
Still doth the misanthrope appear?
He has returned, say in what guise?
What is his latest character?
What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,
Philanthropist or patriot,
Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,
Or other mask donned playfully?
Or a good fellow for the nonce,
Like you and me and all the rest?--
But this is my advice, 'twere best
Not to behave as he did once--
Society he duped enow."
"Is he known to you?"--"Yes and No."Wherefore regarding him express
Perverse, unfavourable views?
Is it that human restlessness
For ever carps, condemns, pursues?
Is it that ardent souls of flame
By recklessness amuse or shame
Selfish nonentities around?
That mind which yearns for space is bound?
And that too often we receive
Professions eagerly for deeds,
That crass stupidity misleads,
That we by cant ourselves deceive,
That mediocrity alone
Without disgust we look upon?Happy he who in youth was young,
Happy who timely grew mature,
He who life's frosts which early wrung
Hath gradually learnt to endure;
By visions who was ne'er deranged
Nor from the mob polite estranged,
At twenty who was prig or swell,
At thirty who was married well,
At fifty who relief obtained
From public and from private ties,
Who glory, wealth and dignities
Hath tranquilly in turn attained,
And unto whom we all allude
As to a worthy man and good!But sad is the reflection made,
In vain was youth by us received,
That we her constantly betrayed
And she at last hath us deceived;
That our desires which noblest seemed,
The purest of the dreams we dreamed,
Have one by one all withered grown
Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown--
'Tis fearful to anticipate
Nought but of dinners a long row,
To look on life as on a show,
Eternally to imitate
The seemly crowd, partaking nought
Its passions and its modes of thought.The butt of scandal having been,
'Tis dreadful--ye agree, I hope--
To pass with reasonable men
For a fictitious misanthrope,
A visionary mortified,
Or monster of Satanic pride,
Or e'en the "Demon" of my strain.
Oneguine--take him up again--
In duel having killed his friend
And reached, with nought his mind to engage,
The twenty-sixth year of his age,
Wearied of leisure in the end,
Without profession, business, wife,
He knew not how to spend his life.
Him a disquietude did seize,
A wish from place to place to roam,
A very troublesome disease,
In some a willing martyrdom.
Abandoned he his country seat,
Of woods and fields the calm retreat,
Where every day before his eyes
A blood-bespattered shade would rise,
And aimless journeys did commence--
But still remembrance to him clings,
His travels like all other things
Inspired but weariness intense;
Returning, from his ship amid
A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.
Behold, the crowd begins to stir,
A whisper runs along the hall,
A lady draws the hostess near,
Behind her a grave general.
Her manners were deliberate,
Reserved, but not inanimate,
Her eyes no saucy glance address,
There was no angling for success.
Her features no grimaces bleared;
Of affectation innocent,
Calm and without embarrassment,
A faithful model she appeared
Of "comme il faut." Shishkoff, forgive!
I can't translate the adjective.
Ladies in crowds around her close,
Her with a smile old women greet,
The men salute with lower bows
And watch her eye's full glance to meet.
Maidens before her meekly move
Along the hall, and high above
The crowd doth head and shoulders rise
The general who accompanies.
None could her beautiful declare,
Yet viewing her from head to foot,
None could a trace of that impute,
Which in the elevated sphere
Of London life is "vulgar" called
And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.I like this word exceedingly
Although it will not bear translation,
With us 'tis quite a novelty
Not high in general estimation;
'Twould serve ye in an epigram--
But turn we once more to our dame.
Enchanting, but unwittingly,
At table she was sitting by
The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,
The Neva's Cleopatra, and
None the conviction could withstand
That Nina's marble symmetry,
Though dazzling its effulgence white,
Could not eclipse her neighbour's light."And is it," meditates Eugene.
"And is it she? It must be--no--
How! from the waste of steppes unseen,"--
And the eternal lorgnette through
Frequent and rapid doth his glance
Seek the forgotten countenance
Familiar to him long ago.
"Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know
The lady in the crimson cap
Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?"--
The prince's eye Oneguine seeks:
"Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!
But stop! I will present thee, if
You choose."--"But who is she?"--"My wife.""So thou art wed! I did not know.
Long ago?"--"'Tis the second year."
"To--?"--"Larina."--"Tattiana?"--"So.
And dost thou know her?"--"We live near."
"Then come with me." The prince proceeds,
His wife approaches, with him leads
His relative and friend as well.
The lady's glance upon him fell--
And though her soul might be confused,
And vehemently though amazed
She on the apparition gazed,
No signs of trouble her accused,
A mien unaltered she preserved,
Her bow was easy, unreserved.Ah no! no faintness her attacked
Nor sudden turned she red or white,
Her brow she did not e'en contract
Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.
Though he surveyed her at his ease,
Not the least trace Oneguine sees
Of the Tattiana of times fled.
He conversation would have led--
But could not. Then she questioned him:--
"Had he been long here, and where from?
Straight from their province had he come?"--
Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim
Unto her husband, went away--
Transfixed Oneguine mine doth stay.Is this the same Tattiana, say,
Before whom once in solitude,
In the beginning of this lay,
Deep in the distant province rude,
Impelled by zeal for moral worth,
He salutary rules poured forth?
The maid whose note he still possessed
Wherein the heart its vows expressed,
Where all upon the surface lies,--
That girl--but he must dreaming be--
That girl whom once on a time he
Could in a humble sphere despise,
Can she have been a moment gone
Thus haughty, careless in her tone?He quits the fashionable throng
And meditative homeward goes,
Visions, now sad, now grateful, long
Do agitate his late repose.
He wakes--they with a letter come--
The Princess N. will be at home
On such a day. O Heavens, 'tis she!
Oh! I accept. And instantly
He a polite reply doth scrawl.
What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?
In the recesses what hath stirred
Of a heart cold and cynical?
Vexation? Vanity? or strove
Again the plague of boyhood--love?The hours once more Oneguine counts,
Impatient waits the close of day,
But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts
And gallops to her house away.
Trembling he seeks the young princess--
Tattiana finds in loneliness.
Together moments one or two
They sat, but conversation's flow
Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,
Sits by her gloomily, desponds,
Scarce to her questions he responds,
Full of exasperating thought.
He fixedly upon her stares--
She calm and unconcerned appears.The husband comes and interferes
With this unpleasant _tete-a-tete_,
With Eugene pranks of former years
And jests doth recapitulate.
They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.
The conversation was revived
By the coarse wit of worldly hate;
But round the hostess scintillate
Light sallies without coxcombry,
Awhile sound conversation seems
To banish far unworthy themes
And platitudes and pedantry,
And never was the ear affright
By liberties or loose or light.And yet the city's flower was there,
Noblesse and models of the mode,
Faces which we meet everywhere
And necessary fools allowed.
Behold the dames who once were fine
With roses, caps and looks malign;
Some marriageable maids behold,
Blank, unapproachable and cold.
Lo, the ambassador who speaks
Economy political,
And with gray hair ambrosial
The old man who has had his freaks,
Renowned for his acumen, wit,
But now ridiculous a bit.Behold Sabouroff, whom the age
For baseness of the spirit scorns,
Saint Priest, who every album's page
With blunted pencil-point adorns.
Another tribune of the ball
Hung like a print against the wall,
Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,
Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.
The traveller, bird of passage he,
Stiff, overstarched and insolent,
Awakens secret merriment
By his embarrassed dignity--
Mute glances interchanged aside
Meet punishment for him provide.
But my Oneguine the whole eve
Within his mind Tattiana bore,
Not the young timid maid, believe,
Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,
But the indifferent princess,
Divinity without access
Of the imperial Neva's shore.
O Men, how very like ye are
To Eve the universal mother,
Possession hath no power to please,
The serpent to unlawful trees
Aye bids ye in some way or other--
Unless forbidden fruit we eat,
Our paradise is no more sweet.Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,
How thoroughly her part she took!
How soon to habits she conformed
Which crushing dignity must brook!
Who would the maiden innocent
In the unmoved, magnificent
Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?
And he had made her heart beat quick!
'Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,
Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,
She mourned and to the moon would raise
The languid eye of love-sick maids,
Dreaming perchance in weal or woe
To end with him her path below.To Love all ages lowly bend,
But the young unpolluted heart
His gusts should fertilize, amend,
As vernal storms the fields athwart.
Youth freshens beneath Passion's showers,
Develops and matures its powers,
And thus in season the rich field
Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.
But at a later, sterile age,
The solstice of our earthly years,
Mournful Love's deadly trace appears
As storms which in chill autumn rage
And leave a marsh the fertile ground
And devastate the woods around.There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!
Tattiana loved as when a lad,
Both day and night he now must pass
In love-lorn meditation sad.
Careless of every social rule,
The crystals of her vestibule
He daily in his drives drew near
And like a shadow haunted her.
Enraptured was he if allowed
To swathe her shoulders in the furs,
If his hot hand encountered hers,
Or he dispersed the motley crowd
Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,
Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.She seemed of him oblivious,
Despite the anguish of his breast,
Received him freely at her house,
At times three words to him addressed
In company, or simply bowed,
Or recognized not in the crowd.
No coquetry was there, I vouch--
Society endures not such!
Oneguine's cheek grew ashy pale,
Either she saw not or ignored;
Oneguine wasted; on my word,
Already he grew phthisical.
All to the doctors Eugene send,
And they the waters recommend.He went not--sooner was prepared
To write his forefathers to warn
Of his approach; but nothing cared
Tattiana--thus the sex is born.--
He obstinately will remain,
Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.
Sickness more courage doth command
Than health, so with a trembling hand
A love epistle he doth scrawl.
Though correspondence as a rule
He used to hate--and was no fool--
Yet suffering emotional
Had rendered him an invalid;
But word for word his letter read.All is foreseen. My secret drear
Will sound an insult in your ear.
What acrimonious scorn I trace
Depicted on your haughty face!
What do I ask? What cause assigned
That I to you reveal my mind?
To what malicious merriment,
It may be, I yield nutriment!
Meeting you in times past by chance,
Warmth I imagined in your glance,
But, knowing not the actual truth,
Restrained the impulses of youth;
Also my wretched liberty
I would not part with finally;
This separated us as well--
Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,
From everything the heart held dear
I then resolved my heart to tear;
Unknown to all, without a tie,
I thought--retirement, liberty,
Will happiness replace. My God!
How I have erred and felt the rod!
No, ever to behold your face,
To follow you in every place,
Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,
To watch with lovers' ecstasies,
Long listen, comprehend the whole
Of your perfections in my soul,
Before you agonized to die--
This, this were true felicity!
But such is not for me. I brood
Daily of love in solitude.
My days of life approach their end,
Yet I in idleness expend
The remnant destiny concedes,
And thus each stubbornly proceeds.
I feel, allotted is my span;
But, that life longer may remain,
At morn I must assuredly
Know that thy face that day I see.
I tremble lest my humble prayer
You with stern countenance declare
The artifice of villany--
I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.
If ye but knew how dreadful 'tis
To bear love's parching agonies--
To burn, yet reason keep awake
The fever of the blood to slake--
A passionate desire to bend
And, sobbing at your feet, to blend
Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess
All that the heart would fain express--
Yet with a feigned frigidity
To arm the tongue and e'en the eye,
To be in conversation clear
And happy unto you appear.
So be it! But internal strife
I cannot longer wage concealed.
The die is cast! Thine is my life!
Into thy hands my fate I yield!No answer! He another sent.
Epistle second, note the third,
Remained unnoticed. Once he went
To an assembly--she appeared
Just as he entered. How severe!
She will not see, she will not hear.
Alas! she is as hard, behold,
And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.
Oh, how her lips compressed restrain
The indignation of her heart!
A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:
Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?
Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!
Upon her brow sits wrath alone--And it may be a secret dread
Lest the world or her lord divine
A certain little escapade
Well known unto Oneguine mine.
'Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee
Cursing his own stupidity,
And brooding o'er the ills he bore,
Society renounced once more.
Then in the silent cabinet
He in imagination saw
The time when Melancholy's claw
'Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,
Caught him and by the collar took
And shut him in a lonely nook.He read as vainly as before,
Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:
He read the unbelieving Bayle,
Also the works of Fontenelle,
Some Russian authors he perused--
Nought in the universe refused:
Nor almanacs nor newspapers,
Which lessons unto us repeat,
Wherein I castigation get;
And where a madrigal occurs
Writ in my honour now and then--
_E sempre bene_, gentlemen!
But what results? His eyes peruse
But thoughts meander far away--
Ideas, desires and woes confuse
His intellect in close array.
His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,
On lines invisible are fixt;
'Twas these he read and these alone
His spirit was intent upon.
They were the wonderful traditions
Of kindly, dim antiquity,
Dreams with no continuity,
Prophecies, threats and apparitions,
The lively trash of stories long
Or letters of a maiden young.And by degrees upon him grew
A lethargy of sense, a trance,
And soon imagination threw
Before him her wild game of chance.
And now upon the snow in thaw
A young man motionless he saw,
As one who bivouacs afield,
And heard a voice cry--_Why! He's killed!_--
And now he views forgotten foes,
Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,
Bevies of treacherous maidens young;
Of thankless friends the circle rose,
A mansion--by the window, see!
She sits alone--'tis ever _she!_So frequently his mind would stray
He well-nigh lost the use of sense,
Almost became a poet say--
Oh! what had been his eminence!
Indeed, by force of magnetism
A Russian poem's mechanism
My scholar without aptitude
At this time almost understood.
How like a poet was my chum
When, sitting by his fire alone
Whilst cheerily the embers shone,
He "Benedetta" used to hum,
Or "Idol mio," and in the grate
Would lose his slippers or gazette.Time flies! a genial air abroad,
Winter resigned her empire white,
Oneguine ne'er as poet showed
Nor died nor lost his senses quite.
Spring cheered him up, and he resigned
His chambers close wherein confined
He marmot-like did hibernate,
His double sashes and his grate,
And sallied forth one brilliant morn--
Along the Neva's bank he sleighs,
On the blue blocks of ice the rays
Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,
The snow upon the streets doth melt--
Whither along them doth he pelt?Oneguine whither gallops? Ye
Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!
Unto his own Tattiana he,
Incorrigible rogue, doth go.
Her house he enters, ghastly white,
The vestibule finds empty quite--
He enters the saloon. 'Tis blank!
A door he opens. But why shrank
He back as from a sudden blow?--
Alone the princess sitteth there,
Pallid and with dishevelled hair,
Gazing upon a note below.
Her tears flow plentifully and
Her cheek reclines upon her hand.Oh! who her speechless agonies
Could not in that brief moment guess!
Who now could fail to recognize
Tattiana in the young princess!
Tortured by pangs of wild regret,
Eugene fell prostrate at her feet--
She starts, nor doth a word express,
But gazes on Oneguine's face
Without amaze or wrath displayed:
His sunken eye and aspect faint,
Imploring looks and mute complaint
She comprehends. The simple maid
By fond illusions once possest
Is once again made manifest.
His kneeling posture he retains--
Calmly her eyes encounter his--
Insensible her hand remains
Beneath his lips' devouring kiss.
What visions then her fancy thronged--
A breathless silence then, prolonged--
But finally she softly said:
"Enough, arise! for much we need
Without disguise ourselves explain.
Oneguine, hast forgotten yet
The hour when--Fate so willed--we met
In the lone garden and the lane?
How meekly then I heard you preach--
To-day it is my turn to teach.
"Oneguine, I was younger then,
And better, if I judge aright;
I loved you--what did I obtain?
Affection how did you requite?
But with austerity!--for you
No novelty--is it not true?--
Was the meek love a maiden feels.
But now--my very blood congeals,
Calling to mind your icy look
And sermon--but in that dread hour
I blame not your behaviour--
An honourable course ye took,
Displayed a noble rectitude--
My soul is filled with gratitude!
"Then, in the country, is't not true?
And far removed from rumour vain;
I did not please you. Why pursue
Me now, inflict upon me pain?--
Wherefore am I your quarry held?--
Is it that I am now compelled
To move in fashionable life,
That I am rich, a prince's wife?--
Because my lord, in battles maimed,
Is petted by the Emperor?--
That my dishonour would ensure
A notoriety proclaimed,
And in society might shed
A bastard fame prohibited?
"I weep. And if within your breast
My image hath not disappeared,
Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,
Your conversation cold and hard,
If the choice in my power were,
To lawless love I should prefer--
And to these letters and these tears.
For visions of my childish years
Then ye were barely generous,
Age immature averse to cheat--
But now--what brings you to my feet?--
How mean, how pusillanimous!
A prudent man like you and brave
To shallow sentiment a slave!
"Oneguine, all this sumptuousness,
The gilding of life's vanities,
In the world's vortex my success,
My splendid house and gaieties--
What are they? Gladly would I yield
This life in masquerade concealed,
This glitter, riot, emptiness,
For my wild garden and bookcase,--
Yes! for our unpretending home,
Oneguine--the beloved place
Where the first time I saw your face,--
Or for the solitary tomb
Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie
Beneath a cross and shrubbery.
"'Twas possible then, happiness--
Nay, near--but destiny decreed--
My lot is fixed--with thoughtlessness
It may be that I did proceed--
With bitter tears my mother prayed,
And for Tattiana, mournful maid,
Indifferent was her future fate.
I married--now, I supplicate--
For ever your Tattiana leave.
Your heart possesses, I know well,
Honour and pride inflexible.
I love you--to what end deceive?--
But I am now another's bride--
For ever faithful will abide."
She rose--departed. But Eugene
Stood as if struck by lightning fire.
What a storm of emotions keen
Raged round him and of balked desire!
And hark! the clank of spurs is heard
And Tania's husband soon appeared.--
But now our hero we must leave
Just at a moment which I grieve
Must be pronounced unfortunate--
For long--for ever. To be sure
Together we have wandered o'er
The world enough. Congratulate
Each other as the shore we climb!
Hurrah! it long ago was time!
Reader, whoever thou mayst be,
Foeman or friend, I do aspire
To part in amity with thee!
Adieu! whate'er thou didst desire
From careless stanzas such as these,
Of passion reminiscences,
Pictures of the amusing scene,
Repose from labour, satire keen,
Or faults of grammar on its page--
God grant that all who herein glance,
In serious mood or dalliance
Or in a squabble to engage,
May find a crumb to satisfy.
Now we must separate. Good-bye!
And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,
Thou also, my ideal true,
And thou, persistent to the end,
My little book. With thee I knew
All that a poet could desire,
Oblivion of life's tempest dire,
Of friends the grateful intercourse--
Oh, many a year hath run its course
Since I beheld Eugene and young
Tattiana in a misty dream,
And my romance's open theme
Glittered in a perspective long,
And I discerned through Fancy's prism
Distinctly not its mechanism.
But ye to whom, when friendship heard,
The first-fruits of my tale I read,
As Saadi anciently averred--
Some are afar and some are dead.
Without them Eugene is complete;
And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;
Was drawn, ideal of my lay--
Ah! what hath fate not torn away!
Happy who quit life's banquet seat
Before the dregs they shall divine
Of the cup brimming o'er with wine--
Who the romance do not complete,
But who abandon it--as I
Have my Oneguine--suddenly.
